Linear algebra is a fairly extensive subject that covers vectors and matrices, determinants, systems of linear equations, vector spaces and linear transformations, eigenvalue problems, and other topics. As an area of study it has a broad appeal in that it has many applications in engineering, physics, geometry, computer science, economics, and other areas. It also contributes to a deeper understanding of mathematics itself.
  Matrices, which are rectangular arrays of numbers or functions, and vectors are the main tools of linear algebra. Matrices are important because they let us express large amounts of data and functions in an organized and concise form. Furthermore, since matrices are single objects, we denote them by single letters and calculate with them directly. All these features have made matrices and vectors very popular for expressing scientific and mathematical ideas.
The numbers (or functions) are called entries or, less commonly, elements of the matrix. The first matrix in (1) has two rows, which are the horizontal lines of entries. Furthermore, it has three columns, which are the vertical lines of entries. The second and third matrices are square matrices, which means that each has as many rows as columns- 3 and 2, respectively. The entries of the second matrix have two indices, signifying their location within the matrix. The first index is the number of the row and the second is the number of the column, so that together the entry's position is uniquely identified. For example, a23 (read a two three) is in Row 2 and Column 3, etc. The notation is standard and applies to all matrices, including those that are not square.
  Matrices having just a single row or column are called vectors. Thus, the fourth matrix in (1) has just one row and is called a row vector. The last matrix in (1) has just one column and is called a column vector. Because the goal of the indexing of entries was to uniquely identify the position of an element within a matrix, one index suffices for vectors, whether they are row or column vectors. Thus, the third entry of the row vector in (1) is denoted by a3.
Vectors
A vector is a matrix with only one row or column. Its entries are called the components
of the vector. We shall denote vectors by lowercase boldface letters
One node is the reference node (grounded node, whose voltage is zero).
Matrix Multiplication
Matrix multiplication means that one multiplies matrices by matrices. Its definition is standard but it looks artificial. Thus you have to study matrix multiplication carefully, multiply a few matrices together for practice until you can understand how to do it. Here then is the definition. (Motivation follows later.)
Triangular Matrices. Upper triangular matrices are square matrices that can have nonzero entries only on and above the main diagonal, whereas any entry below the diagonal must be zero. Similarly, lower triangular matrices can have nonzero entries only on and below the main diagonal. Any entry on the main diagonal of a triangular matrix may be zero or not.
Diagonal Matrices.  These are square matrices that can have nonzero entries only on the main diagonal. Any entry above or below the main diagonal must be zero.
  If all the diagonal entries of a diagonal matrix S are equal, say, c, we call S a scalar matrix because multiplication of any square matrix A of the same size by S has the same effect as the multiplication by a scalar
Determinants. Cramer's Rule
Determinants were originally introduced for solving linear systems. Although impractical in computations, they have important engineering applications in eigenvalue problems (Sec. .), differential equations, vector algebra (Sec. .), and in other areas. They can be introduced in several equivalent ways. Our definition is particularly for dealing with linear systems.
A determinant of order n is a scalar associated with an n X n (hence square!) matrix
General Properties of Determinants
There is an attractive way of finding determinants () that consists of applying elementary row operations to (). By doing so we obtain an "upper triangular" determinant (see Sec. ., for definition with "matrix" replaced by "determinant") whose value is then very easy to compute, being just the product of its diagonal entries.
1 Introduction
Our goal here is to recognize a sign language mea sured from wearable sensor gloves. A sign lan guage is expressed as a sequence of gestural pat terns to convey a meaning. Hidden Markov mod els (HMMs) have been shown to be successful in temporal pattern recognition, such as speech, handwriting, and gesture recognition [4]. In this project, we investigate how well HMMs can per form when applied to sign language recognition. We also investigate how different initialization methods and model selections affect the overall performance on classification.

2 Data Description
We used two different types of datasets for the sign language recognition; one from a single signer and another one from five signers, herein called XS and XM , respectively. We obtained the datasets from the UCI Machine Learning Repository 1 2. Although the datasets are for Australian Sign Language (Auslan), we believe that the underly ing classification method should be generalizable to other sign languages.
The two datasets are multivariate time series of realvalued data. XS has 27 samples for each 95 signs captured from a native singer using two highquality position trackers and two Fifth Di mension Technologies (5DT) gloves for both hands [1]. XM has 70 samples for each 95 signs captured from five signers using only a single lowquality position tracker, the Nintendo Power Glove. The 95 signs were selected to cover all the typical hand shapes and movements [4]. In some cases, signs that were difficult to distinguish were deliberately chosen [4].

1http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/
2ThedatasetsaredonatedbyM.W. Kadous who used it for his PhD dissertation (http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/ waleed/tml/data/) [4].

Each data sample in XS consists of a sequence of 22dimensional feature vectors. The features include x, y, z, roll, pitch, yaw of the hand ori entation and five bend measures of the five fingers. Same features are captured for both hands. The data sampling rate of the capturing system is about 100 frames/sec. The average length of each sign is approximately 57 frames [1].
Each data sample in XM has rather simple data structure; each sample is consisted of a sequence of 8dimensional feature vectors, measured from right hand, including x, y, z, and roll of the hand orientation, and thumb, forefinger, middle and ring finger bend measures. There are 6650 sam ples in total (70 samples95 signs). The num ber of samples measuerd over five signers are not evenly distributed. Each session was taken at a different time, after a break, etc. The data was recorded every 40 ms (25 fps), and the average number of frames per instance is 58, but varies from 30 to 102 [2].
All the samples are labeled with corresponding sign words. Each sample sequence only contains a single sign word.


3 Recognition Approach

Our task is to recognize a sign based on the input sequence of gestural data, so this is a multiclass classification problem (95 classes). We need to identify the basic characteristics of sign language gestures in order to choose a good classification method. Each sign varies in time and space. Also, the signing speed can differ significantly. Even if one person performs the same sign, the speed and position can differ [3]. The ability of HMMs to compensate time and amplitude variations has been shown for speech and character recognition [6]. Due to these characteristics, HMMs appear to be a good approach for sign language recog nition. Many literatures on sign language recognition report the successful usage of HMMs for various settings (continous recognition, user inde pendent recognition, camera based data capture [3][7][8]).
Parameter updates for the Gaussian mixture model are not presented here (they are derived in Problem Set 5). A MATLAB HMM toolbox3 which provides implementations for the above al gorithms is used for the training and the recognition tasks.

Prescaling of data The values for different features in the data have different ranges. In or der for the covariance matrices to be meaningful, the data are standardized across each feature to have a mean value of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This ensures that the components of each feature vector have comparable magnitute.

Initialization Even though the EM algorithm is guaranteed to converge, it can stuck at the lo cal maxima. Therefore, an appropriate way of initializing parameter values is crucial in the EM algorithm.
Additional contstraints on the initial state and transition parameters are applied during the ini tializaiton so that the model follows the Bakis topology shown in Figure1.
first divide each sample sequence equally among the number of states of the model, and group the data from the same state together. Then the k means algorithm is used to get the0 and S0 values for each state. For the covariance ma trix, we initialize it mainly with diagonal matri ces, but also test with full matrices. The mixture paramters q(z | s) are initialized to random values with the constraint that k

The experiments on the high quality single singer dataset show promising result on using HMMs for sign language recognition. Further work can be done to improve the method for recognition. Dif ferent number of states can be used for for dif ferent signs to accommodate different sign com plexities. With a newly acquired Cyberglove in our lab (Multimodal Understanding Group, MIT CSAIL), more training data can be collected and tested to provide more statistically significant re sult. We only presented isolated sign recognition here, however continuous sign language recogni tion will be the next step to make the system more useful. Sign langauge recognition also provides a good starting point towards natural gesture recog nition.

The performance gap between XS and XM is very large. The biggest reason for this would be the quality of data. Compared to the single signer dataset XS, the fivesigner dataset XM has very low quality data.
First of all, XM has 8 features for one hand (righthand), whereas XS has 22 features for both hands. In general, most of the sign languages re quire two hands to convey their meanings. There could be similar signs that are hard to differen tiate only using righthand data. In fact, for the smaller number of signs (5 signs) from XM , the error rate is less than 0.2. Secondly, the sam pling period for XM is 40ms whereas for XS is 10ms. This can increase the ambiguity among the dataset XM because it might have missed some key gestures that characterize the meaning of a sign. Thirdly, XS was captured from a native signer whereas XM was captured from five sign ers (including one novice signer, one sign linguist, two Auslan interpreters, and one native signer). In XM , the native signer has only recorded 8 sam ples for each sign while the novice signer recorded 20 samples. This potentially decreases the accu racy of the signs.
Lastly, but most importantly, XS was mea sured using highquality postion trackers and sen sor gloves, while XM was measured using one low quality sensor glove only. Specifically, XM has 8bit accuracy for teh position information which was calculated based on the ultrasound emissions from the glove. This information is particulary susceptible to occasional "spike" caused by ran dom ultrasound noise [2]. For XS, however, the data of the position and the orientation informa tion have 14bit accuracy. This means positional error is less than 1cm and angle error is less than
0.5 degree. These are the reasons for the huge gap in the error rates between XS and XM .
Although the error rate for XM is relatively high, we should still recognize the merit in the method. For a multiclass classification problem with 95 classes, a "random guess" algorithma generic baselinewould get an error rate of 99 per cent [4].

Scholars across an array of disciplines including social psychologists have been trying to explain the meaning of love for over a century but its polysemous nature has made it difficult to fully understand. In this paper, a quadruple framework of attraction, resonance or connection, trust, and respect are proposed to explain the meaning of love. The framework is used to explain how love grows and dies and to describe brand love, romantic love, and parental love. The synergistic relationship between the factors and how their variations modulate the intensity or levels of love are discussed.
Keywords: triangular theory of love, Romance, brand love, parental love, maternal love, Meaning of love, Definition of love, am I in love


INTRODUCTION
Scholars across an array of disciplines have tried to define the meaning and nature of love with some success but questions remain. Indeed, it has been described as a propensity to think, feel, and behave positively toward another (Hendrick and Hendrick, 1986). However, the application of this approach has been unsuccessful in all forms of love (Berscheid, 2010). Some social psychologists have tried to define love using psychometric techniques. Robert Sternberg Triangular Theory of Love and Clyde and Susan Hendrick's Love Attitudes Scale (LAS) are notable attempts to employ the psychometric approach (Hendrick and Hendrick, 1986; Sternberg, 1986). However, data analysis from the administration of the LAS, Sternberg's scale and the Passionate Love Scale by Hatfield and Sprecher's (1986) found a poor association with all forms of love (Hendrick and Hendrick, 1989). Other studies have found a poor correlation between these and other love scales with different types of love (Whitley, 1993; Sternberg, 1997; Masuda, 2003; Graham and Christiansen, 2009).
  In recent years, the neuropsychological approach to study the nature of love has gained prominence. Research has compared the brain activity of people who were deeply in love while viewing a picture of their partner and friends of the same age using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and concluded that there is a specialized network of the brain involved in love (Bartels and Zeki, 2000). Indeed, several lines of investigation using fMRI have described a specialized area of the brain mediating maternal love (Noriuchi et al., 2008; Noriuchi and Kikuchi, 2013) and, fMRI studies have implicated multiple brain systems particularly the reward system in romantic love (Aron et al., 2005; Fisher et al., 2005, 2010; Beauregard et al., 2009). Brain regions including ventral tegmental area, anterior insula, ventral striatum, and supplementary motor area have been demonstrated to mediate social and material reward anticipation (Gu et al., 2019). Although brain imaging provides a unique insight into the nature of love, making sense of the psychological significance or inference of fMRI data is problematic (Cacioppo et al., 2003).



   Also, there has been growing interests in the neurobiology of love. Indeed, evidence suggests possible roles for oxytocin, vasopressin, dopamine, serotonin, testosterone, cortisol, morphinergic system, and nerve growth factor in love and attachment (Esch and Stefano, 2005; De Boer et al., 2012; Seshadri, 2016; Feldman, 2017). However, in many cases, definite proof is still lacking and the few imaging studies on love are limited by selection bias on the duration of a love affair, gender and cultural differences (De Boer et al., 2012).
   So, while advances have been made in unraveling the meaning of love, questions remain and a framework that can be employed to understand love in all its forms remains to be developed or proposed. The objective of this article is to propose a novel framework that can be applied to all forms of love.

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT (THE AAC MODEL)
In the past few decades, the psychological literature has defined and described different forms of love and from these descriptions, the role of attraction, attachment-commitment, and caregiving (AAC), appears to be consistent in all forms of love.
   Attraction theory is one of the first approaches to explain the phenomenon of love and several studies and scholarly works have described the importance of attraction in different forms of love (Byrne and Griffitt, 1973; Berscheid and Hatfield, 1978; Fisher et al., 2006; Braxton-Davis, 2010; Grant-Jacob, 2016). Attraction has been described as an evolutionary adaptation of humans for mating, reproduction, and parenting (Fisher et al., 2002a, 2006).
  The role of attachment in love has also been extensively investigated. Attachment bonds have been described as a critical feature of mammals including parent-infant, pair- bonds, conspecifics, and peers (Feldman, 2017). Indeed, neural networks including the interaction of oxytocin and dopamine in the striatum have been implicated in attachment bonds (Feldman, 2017). The key features of attachment include proximity maintenance, safety and security, and separation distress (Berscheid, 2010). Multiple lines of research have proposed that humans possess an innate behavioral system of attachment that is essential in love (Harlow, 1958; Bowlby, 1977, 1988, 1989; Ainsworth, 1985; Hazan and Shaver, 1987;
Bretherton, 1992; Carter, 1998; Burkett and Young, 2012). Attachment is essential to commitment and satisfaction in a relationship (P loquin et al., 2013) and commitment leads to greater intimacy (Sternberg, 1986).
  Also, several lines of evidence have described the role of caregiving in love. It has been proposed that humans possess an inborn caregiving system that complements their attachment system (Bowlby, 1973; Ainsworth, 1985). Indeed, several studies have used caregiving scale and compassionate love scale, to describe the role of caring, concern, tenderness, supporting, helping, and understanding the other(s), in love and relationships (Kunce and Shaver, 1994; Sprecher and Fehr, 2005). Mutual communally responsive relationships in which partners attend to one another's needs and welfare with the expectation that the

other will return the favor when their own needs arise (Clark and Mills, 1979; Clark and Monin, 2006), have been described as key in all types of relationships including friendship, family, and romantic and compassionate love (Berscheid, 2010).
  Attachment and caregiving reinforce each other in relationships. Evidence suggests that sustained caregiving is frequently accompanied by the growth of familiarity between the caregiver and the receiver (Bowlby, 1989, p. 115) strengthening attachment (Berscheid, 2010). Several studies have proposed that attachment has a positive influence on caregiving behavior in love and relationships (Carnelley et al., 1996; Collins and Feeney, 2000; Feeney and Collins, 2001; Mikulincer, 2006; Canterberry and Gillath, 2012; P loquin et al., 2013).
  The AAC model can be seen across the literature on love. Robert Sternberg triangular theory of love which proposes that love has three components -intimacy, passion, and commitment (Sternberg, 1986), essentially applies the AAC model. Passion, a key factor in his theory, is associated with attraction (Berscheid and Hatfield, 1978), and many passionate behaviors including increased energy, focused attention, intrusive thinking, obsessive following, possessive mate guarding, goal-oriented behaviors and motivation to win and keep a preferred mating partner (Fisher et al., 2002b, 2006; Fisher, 2005). Also, evidence indicates that attachment is central to intimacy, another pillar of the triangular theory (Morris, 1982; Feeney and Noller, 1990; Oleson, 1996; Grabill and Kent, 2000). Commitment, the last pillar of the triangular theory, is based on interdependence and social exchange theories (Stanley et al., 2010), which is connected to mutual caregiving and secure attachment.
  Hendrick and Hendrick's (1986), Love Attitudes Scale (LAS) which measures six types of love (Hendrick and Hendrick, 1986) is at its core based on the AAC model. Similarly, numerous works on love (Rubin, 1970; Hatfield and Sprecher, 1986; Fehr, 1994; Grote and Frieze, 1994), have applied one or all of the factors in the ACC model. Berscheid (2010), proposed four candidates for a temporal model of love including companionate love, romantic love, and compassionate love and adult attachment love. As described, these different types of love (romantic, companionate, compassionate, and attachment) all apply at least one or all of the factors in the AAC model.

NEW THEORY (THE QUADRUPLE FRAMEWORK)
The AAC model can be fully captured by four fundamental factors; attraction, connection or resonance, trust, and respect, providing a novel framework that could explain love in all its forms. Table 1 shows the core factors of love, and the four factors derived from them.
Attraction
Evidence suggests that both attachment and attraction play a role in obsession or passion observed in love (Fisher et al., 2005; Honari and Saremi, 2015). Attraction is influenced by the value or appeal perceived from a relationship and this affects commitment (Rusbult, 1980).

Attraction Attachment	Attraction	Physical attributes, personality, wealth, value, etc.	Passion, intimacy, commitment.

Attachment-Commitment Caregiving

Connection/ resonance

Similarity, proximity, familiarity, positive shared experiences, interdependence, novelty.

Friendship, separation distress, worry, and concern, commitment and Intimacy, compassion or caregiving.

Attachment-Commitment Caregiving
Attachment-Commitment Caregiving

Trust	Reliability, familiarity, mutual self-disclosures, positive shared experiences.
Respect	Reciprocal appreciation, admiration, consideration, concern for wellbeing, and tolerance

Intimacy, commitment, compassion or caregiving Commitment, intimacy, compassion or caregiving





Connection or Resonance
Connection is key to commitment, caregiving, and intimacy. It creates a sense of oneness in relationships and it is strengthened by proximity, familiarity, similarity, and positive shared experiences (Sullivan et al., 2011; Beckes et al., 2013). Homogeneity or similarity has been observed to increase social capital and engagement among people (Costa and Kahn, 2003a,b), and it has been described as foundational to human relationships (Tobore, 2018, pp. 6-13). Research indicates that similarity plays a key role in attachment and companionship as people are more likely to form long-lasting and successful relationships with those who are more similar to themselves (Burgess and Wallin, 1954; Byrne, 1971; Berscheid and Reis, 1998; Lutz-Zois et al., 2006). Proximity plays a key role in caregiving as people are more likely to show compassion to those they are familiar with or those closest to them (Sprecher and Fehr, 2005). Similarity and proximity contribute to feelings of familiarity (Berscheid, 2010). Also, caregiving and empathy are positively related to emotional interdependence (Hatfield et al., 1994).

Trust
Trust is crucial for love (Esch and Stefano, 2005) and it plays an important role in relationship intimacy and caregiving (Rempel and Holmes, 1985; Wilson et al., 1998; Salazar, 2015), as well as attachment (Rodriguez et al., 2015; Bidmon, 2017). Familiarity is a sine qua non for trust (Luhmann, 1979), and trust is key to relationship satisfaction (Simpson, 2007; Fitzpatrick and Lafontaine, 2017).

Respect
Respect is cross-cultural and universal (Frei and Shaver, 2002; Hendrick et al., 2010) and has been described as fundamental in love (Hendrick et al., 2011). It plays a cardinal role in interpersonal relations at all levels (Hendrick et al., 2010). Indeed, it is essential in relationship commitment and satisfaction (Hendrick and Hendrick, 2006) and relationship intimacy and attachment (Alper, 2004; Hendrick et al., 2011).

SYNERGETIC INTERACTIONS OF THE FOUR FACTORS
Connection and Attraction
Similarity, proximity, and familiarity are all important in connection because they promote attachment and a sense of

oneness in a relationship (Sullivan et al., 2011; Beckes et al., 2013). Research indicates that proximity (Batool and Malik, 2010) and familiarity positively influence attraction (Norton et al., 2015) and several lines of evidence suggests that people are attracted to those similar to themselves (Sykes et al., 1976; Wetzel and Insko, 1982; Montoya et al., 2008; Batool and Malik, 2010; Collisson and Howell, 2014). Also, attraction mediates similarity and familiarity (Moreland and Zajonc, 1982; Elbedweihy et al., 2016).
Respect and Trust
Evidence suggests that respect promotes trust (Ali et al., 2012).
Connection, Respect, Trust, and Attraction
Trust affects attraction (Singh et al., 2015). Trust and respect can mediate attitude similarity and promote attraction (Singh et al., 2016).
   So, although these factors can operate independently, evidence suggests that the weakening of one factor could negatively affect the others and the status of love. Similarly, the strengthening of one factor positively modulates the others and the status of love.

LOVE CYCLE
Relationships are dynamic and change as events and conditions in the environment change (Berscheid, 2010). Love is associated with causal conditions that respond to these changes favorably or negatively (Berscheid, 2010). In other words, as conditions change, and these factors become present, love is achieved and if they die, it fades. Figure 1 below explains how love grows and dies. Point C in the figure explains the variations in the intensity or levels of love and this variation is influenced by the strength of each factor. The stronger the presence of all factors, the higher the intensity and the lower, the weaker the intensity of love. The concept of non-love is similar to the "non-love" described in Sternberg's triangular theory of love in which all components of love are absent (Sternberg, 1986).

APPLICATION OF THE QUADRUPLE FRAMEWORK ON ROMANTIC, BRAND AND PARENTAL LOVE
Romantic, parental and brand love have been chosen to demonstrate the role of these factors and their interactions in love because there is significant existing literature on them. However, they can be applied to understand love in all its forms.

Romantic Love
Attraction and Romantic Love
Attraction involves both physical and personality traits (Braxton- Davis, 2010; Karandashev and Fata, 2014). To this end, attraction could be subdivided into sexual or material and non-sexual or non-material attraction. Sexual or material attraction includes physical attributes such as beauty, aesthetics, appeal, wealth, etc. In contrast, non-sexual or non-material attraction includes characteristics such as personality, social status, power, humor, intelligence, character, confidence, temperament, honesty, good quality, kindness, integrity, etc. Both types of attraction are not mutually exclusive.
Romantic love has been described as a advanced form of
human attraction system (Fisher et al., 2005) and it fits with the passion component of Sternberg's triangular theory of love which he described as the quickest to recruit (Sternberg, 1986). Indeed, research indicates that physical attractiveness and sensual feelings are essential in romantic love and dating (Brislin and Lewis, 1968; Regan and Berscheid, 1999; Luo and Zhang, 2009; Braxton-Davis, 2010; Ha et al., 2010; Gu guen and Lamy, 2012) and sexual attraction often provides the motivational spark that kickstarts a romantic relationship (Gillath et al., 2008). Behavioral data suggest that love and sex drive follow complementary pathways in the brain (Seshadri, 2016). Indeed, the neuroendocrine system for sexual attraction and attachment appears to work synergistically motivating individuals to both prefer a specific mating partner and to form an attachment to that partner (Seshadri, 2016). Sex promotes the activity of hormones involved in love including arginine vasopressin in the ventral pallidum, oxytocin in the nucleus accumbens and stimulates dopamine release which consequently motivates preference for a partner and strengthens attachment or pair- bonding (Seshadri, 2016).
   Also, romantic love is associated with non-material attraction. Research indicates that many people are attracted to their romantic partner because of personality traits like generosity, kindness, warmth, humor, helpfulness, openness to new ideas (Giles, 2015, pp. 168-169). Findings from a research study on preferences in human mate selection indicate that personality traits such as kindness/considerate and understanding, exciting, and intelligent are strongly preferred in a potential mate (Buss and Barnes, 1986). Indeed, character and physical attractiveness have been found to contribute jointly and significantly to romantic attraction (McKelvie and Matthews, 1976).
   Attraction is key to commitment in a romantic relationship (Rusbult, 1980), indicating that without attraction a romantic relationship could lose its luster. Also, romantic attraction is weakened or declines as the reason for its presence declines or deteriorates. If attraction is sexual or due to material characteristics, then aging or any accident that compromises physical beauty would result in its decline (Braxton-Davis, 2010). Loss of fortune or social status could also weaken attraction and increase tension in a relationship. Indeed, tensions about money increase marital conflicts (Papp et al., 2009; Dew and Dakin, 2011) and predicted subsequent divorce (Amato and Rogers, 1997).Connection in romantic love involves intimacy, friendship or companionship and caregiving and it is strengthened by novelty, proximity, communication, positive shared experiences, familiarity, and similarity. It is what creates a sense of oneness between romantic partners and it is expressed in the form of proximity seeking and maintenance, concern, and compassion (Neto, 2012). Evidence suggests that deeper levels of emotional involvement or attachment increase commitment and cognitive interdependence or tendency to think about the relationship in a pluralistic manner, as reflected in the use of plural pronouns to describe oneself, romantic partner and relationship (Agnew et al., 1998).
   Research indicates that both sexual attraction and friendship are necessary for romantic love (Meyers and Berscheid, 1997; Gillath et al., 2008; Berscheid, 2010), indicating that connection which is essential for companionship plays a key role in romantic love. A study on college students by Hendrick and Hendrick (1993) found that a significant number of the students described their romantic partner as their closest friend (Hendrick and Hendrick, 1993), reinforcing the importance of friendship or companionship in romantic love.
   Similarity along the lines of values, goals, religion, nationality, career, culture, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, language, etc. is essential in liking and friendship in romantic love (Berscheid and Reis, 1998). Research indicates that a partner who shared similar values and interests were more likely to experience stronger love (Jin et al., 2017). Indeed, the more satisfied individuals were with their friendships the more similar they perceived their friends to be to themselves (Morry, 2005). Also, similarity influences perceptions of familiarity (Moreland and Zajonc, 1982), and familiarity plays a role in the formation of attachment and connectedness because it signals safety and security (Bowlby, 1977). Moreover, similarity and familiarity affect caregiving. Sprecher and Fehr (2005), found compassion or caregiving were lower for strangers, and greatest for dating and marital relationships, indicating that similarity and familiarity enhance intimacy and positively influences caregiving (Sprecher and Fehr, 2005).
   Proximity through increased exposure is known to promote liking (Saegert et al., 1973), familiarity and emotional connectedness (Sternberg, 1986; Berscheid, 2010). Exposure through fun times and direct and frequent communication is essential to maintaining and strengthening attachment and connectedness (Sternberg and Grajek, 1984). In Sternberg's

triangular theory, effective communication is described as essential and affects the intimacy component of a relationship (Sternberg, 1986). Indeed, intimacy grows from a combination of mutual self-disclosure and interactions mediated by positive partner responsiveness (Laurenceau et al., 1998, 2005; Manne et al., 2004), indicating that positive feedback and fun times together strengthens connection.
  Also, sexual activity is an important component of the reward system that reinforces emotional attachment (Seshadri, 2016), indicating that sexual activity may increase emotional connectedness and intimacy. Over time in most relationships, predictability grows, and sexual satisfaction becomes readily available. This weakens the erotic and emotional experience associated with romantic love (Berscheid, 2010). Research shows that a reduction in novelty due to the monotony of being with the same person for a long period is the reason for this decline in sexual attraction (Freud and Rieff, 1997, p. 57; Sprecher et al., 2006, p. 467). According to Sternberg (1986), the worst enemy of the intimacy component of love is stagnation. He explained that too much predictability can erode the level of intimacy in a close relationship (Sternberg, 1986). So, novelty is essential to maintaining sexual attraction and strengthening connection in romantic love.
   Jealousy and separation distress which are key features of romantic love (Fisher et al., 2002b), are actions to maintain and protect the emotional union and are expressions of a strong connection. Research has found a significant correlation between anxiety and love (Hatfield et al., 1989) and a positive link between romantic love and jealousy in stable relationships (Mathes and Severa, 1981; Aune and Comstock, 1991; Attridge, 2013; Gomillion et al., 2014). Indeed, individuals who feel strong romantic love tend to be more jealous or sensitive to threats to their relationship (Orosz et al., 2015).
   Connection in romantic love is weakened by distance, a dearth of communication, unsatisfactory sexual activity, divergences or dissimilarity of values and interests, monotony and too much predictability.

Trust and Romantic Love
Trust is the belief that a partner is, and will remain, reliable or dependable (Cook, 2003). Trust in romantic love fits with the intimacy, and commitment components of Sternberg's triangular theory of love which includes being able to count on the loved one in times of need, mutual understanding with the loved one,



sharing of one's self and one's possessions with the loved one and maintaining the relationship (Sternberg, 1986).
   It has been proposed that love activates specific regions in the reward system which results in a reduction in emotional judgment and fear (Seshadri, 2016). This reduced fear or trust has been identified as one of the most important characteristics of a romantic relationship and essential to fidelity, commitment, monogamy, emotional vulnerability, and intimacy (Laborde et al., 2014). Indeed, trust can deepen intimacy, increase commitment and increase mutual monogamy, and make a person lower their guards in the belief that they are safe from harm (Larzelere and Huston, 1980; Bauman and Berman, 2005). People with high trust in romantic relationships tend to expect that their partner will act in their interest causing them to prioritize relationship dependence over making themselves invulnerable from harm or self-protection (Luchies et al., 2013). In contrast, people with low trust in their partner tend to be unsure about whether their partner will act in their interests and prioritize insulating themselves from harm over relationship dependence (Luchies et al., 2013).
   Trust takes time to grow into a romantic relationship. Indeed, people in a relationship come to trust their partners when they see that their partner's action and behavior moves the relationship forward or acts in the interest of the relationship and not themself (Wieselquist et al., 1999). Research indicates that trust is associated with mutual self-disclosure (Larzelere and Huston, 1980), and positive partner responsiveness which are both essential to the experience of friendship and intimacy in romantic relationships (Larzelere and Huston, 1980; Reis and Shaver, 1988; Laurenceau et al., 1998).
   Also, trust influences caregiving and compassion. Evidence suggests that compassion is positively related to trust (Salazar, 2015). Mutual communal responsiveness or caregiving in relationships in which partners attend to one another's needs and welfare is done because they are confident that the other will do the same when or if their own needs arise (Clark and Monin, 2006). Repeated acts of communal responsiveness given with no expectation of payback provide a partner with a sense of security and trust and increase the likelihood that they will be communally responsive if or when the need arises (Clark and Monin, 2006), and contributes to a sense of love in romantic relationships (Berscheid, 2010).
   Loss or weakening of trust could spell the end of romantic love. Indeed, mistrust corrupts intimacy and often indicates that a relationship has ended or near its end (LaFollette and Graham, 1986) and it makes mutual monogamy, and commitment difficult to achieve in a romantic relationship (Towner et al., 2015). A study on individuals who had fallen out of romantic love with their spouse found that loss of trust and intimacy was part of the reason for the dissolution of love (Sailor, 2013).
Respect and Romantic Love
Multiple lines of evidence suggest that respect is expected in both friendships and romantic relationships (Gaines, 1994, 1996). In romantic love, it entails consideration, admiration, high regard, and value for the loved one as a part of one's life (Sternberg and Grajek, 1984; Hendrick et al., 2011).
  
Gottman (1999), found that the basis for a stable and satisfactory marital relationship is friendship filled with fondness and admiration (Gottman, 1999). Respect is considered one of the most important things married couples want from their partner (Gottman, 1994). Grote and Frieze (1994), found that respect correlates with companionate or friendship love (Grote and Frieze, 1994), indicating that respect is essential to intimacy and relationship satisfaction. Also, respect is positively correlated with passion, altruism, self-disclosure, and relationship overall satisfaction (Frei and Shaver, 2002; Hendrick and Hendrick, 2006). It is associated with the tendency to overlook a partner's negative behavior or respond with pro-relationship actions or compassion to their shortcomings (Rusbult et al., 1998; Gottman, 1999).
  Absence or a lack of respect could spell the end of romantic love. Research indicates that there is an expectation of mutual respect in friendship and most relationships and people reacted negatively when this expectation is violated (Hendrick et al., 2011), indicating that a lack of respect could negatively affect commitment and attraction. Indeed, denial of respect is an important negative behavior in friendships and most relationships (Gaines, 1994, 1996) and a lack of respect is a violation of what it means to love one 's partner in a close romantic relationship (Hendrick et al., 2011). Gottman (1993, 1994) identified contempt, criticism, defensiveness, and stonewalling as four of the relationally destructive behavior and he labeled them as "the four horsemen of the apocalypse."

Romantic love summary
Romantic love involves the interactions and synergistic interplay between respect, connection, trust, and attraction. All four must be present in love. Any event that results in the loss of any of these factors could cause romantic love to gradually decline and unless effort is made to replenish it, it will eventually fade or collapse. Romantic love is dynamic and requires significant investment from both partners to keep it alive.

Parental Love
Attraction and Parental Love
Attraction plays an essential role in parental love and it could be material or non-material. Material attraction involves the child's health, gender, accomplishments or success, and attractiveness. In contrast, non-material attraction includes traits such as intelligence, character, and other personality traits.
   Evidence suggests that culture influences gender preference with attraction greater for sons in most cases (Cronk, 1993). Indeed, mothers and fathers have been found to favor the more intelligent and more ambitious/industrious child (Lauricella, 2009). Also, parental perception that investment in a child will cost more than the benefits to be gained from taking care of the child might influence negative behavior toward the child. Indeed, multiple lines of evidence suggest that parental unemployment increases the rates of child maltreatment and abuse (Steinberg et al., 1981; Lindo et al., 2013). Research indicates that teen mothers who have poor social support reported greater unhappiness, were at greater risk for child abuse



and often employed the use of physical punishment toward their child (Haskett et al., 1994; de Pa l and Domenech, 2000).
   Also, several studies have suggested that parents tended to favor healthy children (Mann, 1992; Barratt et al., 1996; Hagen, 1999). However, when resources are plentiful, parents tend to invest equally in less healthy or high-risk children (Beaulieu and Bugental, 2008), because they have abundant resources to go around without compromising the reproductive value of healthy children (Lauricella, 2009).
Connection and Parental Love
Connection creates a sense of oneness between parent and child and involves caregiving, intimacy, and attachment. It is influenced by proximity, positive and unique shared experiences, and similarity along virtually every dimension between parent and child.
   Proximity, and similarity increases attachment and intimacy between parent and child. Research shows that parents are perceived as favoring genetically related children (Salmon et al., 2012), and evidence suggests that paternal resemblance predicted paternal favoritism (Lauricella, 2009). Parental proximity and similarity to a biological child are unique because it is based on genes and blood. In contrast, intimacy between a parent and an adopted child is based solely on shared experiences and proximity and takes time to grow and on many occasions may not develop (Hooks, 1990; Hughes, 1999).
   Dissimilarities or discrepancy in values, attitudes, etc., can create problems between children and parents and can have a profound effect on their relationship. Indeed, evidence suggests that the rebel child tended to be less close to the parents (Rohde et al., 2003). Research has found that adolescents who are less religious than their parents tend to experience lower- quality relationships with their parents which results in higher rates of both internalizing and externalizing symptoms (Kim- Spoon et al., 2012). When parents and family members were very religious, and a child comes out as an atheist, relationship quality could suffer in the form of rejection, anger, despair, or an inability to relate to one another (Zimmerman et al., 2015). A study of lesbian, gay, and bisexual youngsters, for patterns of disclosure of sexual orientation to families, found that those who had disclosed reported verbal and physical abuse by parents and family members (D'Augelli et al., 1998). Honor killing of female children which have been reported in Pakistan and some parts of the Middle East because of deviation from traditional gender roles or crossing of social boundaries that are deemed as taboo in their culture (Lindsey and Sarah, 2010), is another example of the negative effects of the discrepancy in values between parents and child.
   Unique shared experiences between parent and child could increase connection. Bank (1988) observed that the development of favoritism seems to require that the "child's conception or birth be unusual or stressful," (Bank, 1988). Evidence suggests that parents most favored child tended to be last-born child and this is linked to their unique position, vulnerability and neediness (Rohde et al., 2003). Also, proximity, positive experiences and time spent together increases connection and intimacy. Research indicates that parents tend to give more love and support to

the grown child they were historically closest to and got along with (Siennick, 2013). A study of primiparous women found that mothers with greater contact with their infants were more reluctant to leave them with someone else, and engaged more intimately with their child (Klaus et al., 1972).
  Divorce could create distance between a parent and child, weakening connection and intimacy. Indeed, one of the outcomes of divorce is the lessening of contact between divorced non-custodial fathers and their children (Appleby and Palkovitz, 2007), and this can reduce intimacy (Guttmann and Rosenberg, 2003).
   Also, parental separation distress, worry, and concern for their child's welfare, academic performance, and future are expressions of connection and a lack thereof is a sign of poor connection. Indeed, the levels of concern and worry expressed between children and their parents influenced their perceptions of the relationship quality (Hay et al., 2007).
Trust and Parental Love
Trust is essential to parental attachment, intimacy, and caregiving. When there is mistrust, attachment and intimacy between a parent and their child are disrupted or unable to blossom. In Africa and many parts of the world, there have been reports of children being condemned and abandoned by their parents simply because they are tagged as witches with mysterious evil powers (Tedam, 2014; Bartholomew, 2015; Briggs and Whittaker, 2018). The tag of "witchcraft" stirs up fear and anger, causing the child to be perceived as a deadly threat which inevitably damages attachment, intimacy and eliminates the need for caregiving.
   Research has found that firstborn children were most likely to be chosen as those to whom mothers would turn when facing personal problems or crises (Suitor and Pillemer, 2007). This tendency may be linked to trust. Moreover, evidence suggests that the rebel child tended to be less close to the parents (Rohde et al., 2003). In other words, the more obedient, and reliable child is likely to gain the confidence and intimacy of the parents. In contrast, the disobedient and unreliable child is excluded or kept at a distance. Also, trust and poor connection could influence inheritance and disinheritance decisions. Indeed, estrangement, alienation and disaffection of a parent toward a child could result in disinheritance (Batts, 1990; Brashier, 1994, 1996; Foster, 2001; Arroyo et al., 2016).
Respect and Parental Love
Respect in parental love entails treating the child with consideration and regard. This consideration and regard for the child are essential to intimacy, caregiving and attachment. Indeed, respect is foundational to a harmonious relationship between parent and child (Dixon et al., 2008). Evidence suggests that humans possess an innate behavioral system that leads them to form an attachment to a familiar person who provides care, comfort, and protection (Harlow, 1958; Bowlby, 1989). Repeated acts of caregiving contribute to a sense of love in all types of relationships (Berscheid, 2010), reinforcing the role of parental caregiving in fostering intimacy and attachment with the child.



   Taking care of an infant's needs, and making sure they are safe and well, all fall under consideration and regard for the child. Child abuse and neglect (Tedam, 2014; Bartholomew, 2015; Briggs and Whittaker, 2018), is a display of a lack of consideration for the child's need.
   Also, respect in parental love involves admiration. Research has found that fathers treated more ambitious/industrious sons with high regard, and both parents favored the more intelligent and more ambitious/industrious daughters (Lauricella, 2009) indicating that a child that engages in activities or behavior that is highly regarded by their parents may gain favor with their parents, strengthening intimacy and vice versa.
Parental love summary
Parental love involves the interactions and synergistic interplay between respect, connection, trust, and attraction. Any event that results in the loss of any of these factors could cause parental love to gradually decline. In many cases, the behavior and actions of a child significantly influence parental love.
Brand Love
Brand love has been defined as the level of passionate emotional attachment a satisfied or happy consumer has for a brand and evidence suggests it is very similar to interpersonal love (Russo et al., 2011).
Attraction and Brand Love
Attraction plays an essential role in brand love. Material attraction for a brand includes attributes like superior design, quality, and aesthetics, price, benefits, etc. Non-material attraction involves social status symbol, brand personality, uniqueness, distinctiveness, user experience, image, etc. evidence suggests that when talking about loved brands, people often talk passionately about the brand's many attractive qualities such as its exceptional performance, good-looking design, value for money, and other positive attributes (Fournier, 1998; Whang et al., 2004; Carroll and Ahuvia, 2006; Batra et al., 2012). Research on brand love has found that brand attractive attributes such as prestige or uniqueness influence brand passion which affects relevant factors such as purchase intention (Bauer et al., 2007).
  Also, brand attraction influences brand loyalty, and commitment. Indeed, research indicates that brand benefits influences brand loyalty or commitment (Huang et al., 2016). Brand personality (image, distinctiveness, and self-expressive value) is strongly associated with brand identification and loyalty (Kim et al., 2001; Elbedweihy et al., 2016).
Connection and Brand Love
Connection is essential to brand love. It involves brand attachment, commitment, and intimacy and it is strengthened by brand identification, image, familiarity or awareness, proximity, length or frequency of usage and similarity or congruences along virtually every dimension including values, lifestyle, goals, etc. between brand and customer. Brand awareness which means brand familiarity has been described as essential for people to identify with a brand (Pascual and Acad mico, 2015), and it indirectly affects current purchases (Esch et al., 2006).
  Also, brand identification promotes a sense of oneness between a brand and a customer strengthening commitment

and it is driven by brand self-similarity, brand prestige and brand distinctiveness (Stokburger-Sauer et al., 2008). Indeed, brand identification contributes to the development of brand love and brand loyalty (Alnawas and Altarifi, 2016) and brand image and identification influence loyalty and positive word of mouth (Carroll and Ahuvia, 2006; Batra et al., 2012; Anggraeni and Rachmanita, 2015). Brand identity, values and lifestyle similarities to those of the customer appear to have a strong and significant relationship with brand love (Batra et al., 2012; Rauschnabel and Ahuvia, 2014; Alnawas and Altarifi, 2016; Elbedweihy et al., 2016). Findings from research suggest that customer-to-customer similarity and sense of community drive consumer brand identification, loyalty, and engagement (Bergkvist and Bech-Larsen, 2010; Elbedweihy et al., 2016).
   Moreover, proximity and interaction play a role in brand love. Indeed, the duration of the relationship between a customer and a brand is essential in brand love (Albert et al., 2007). Fournier (1998), discussed interdependence which involved frequent brand interactions as necessary for a strong brand relationship (Fournier, 1998). Similarly, Batra et al. (2012) found that having a long-term relationship, positive emotional connection and frequent interactions with a brand was an important aspect of brand love (Batra et al., 2012). Indeed, shared experiences and history between a person and a brand can increase their emotional attachment, make the brand to become an important part of the person's identity narrative and increases their loyalty to the brand (Thomson et al., 2005; Pedeliento et al., 2016).
   Just like romantic love, concern and worry and proximity seeking, or maintenance are an expression of emotional connectedness to the brand. Indeed, anticipated separation distress has been described as a core element of brand love (Batra et al., 2012), and consumers are likely to feel strong desires to maintain proximity with their loved objects, even feeling "separation distress" when they are distanced from them (Thomson et al., 2005; Park et al., 2010).
  Also, novelty through continued innovation is vital to maintaining and strengthening both attraction and connection. According to the Harvard business review, the relationship between brand and consumer go through "ruts" and to "keep the spark" alive, innovation and news are essential (Halloran, 2014). Research indicates that innovation plays a role in brand equity and it impacts brand identification or resonance (Sinha, 2017).
   Lack of brand familiarity or awareness, poor or negative user experience, a dearth of innovation and increased dissimilarities in values and lifestyles between brand and consumer can all weaken brand connection.

Trust and Brand Love
Trust is essential to brand attachment, intimacy, and commitment. It involves confidence and reliability, or dependability of the brand and it is influenced by brand image, familiarity, values, user experience, and quality. Indeed, brand trust directly influences brand love (Turgut and Gultekin, 2015; Meisenzahl, 2017) and a strong relationship exists between brand love and brand trust and identification (Albert and Merunka, 2013). Evidence suggests that brand familiarity influences brand trust (Ha and Perks, 2005) and brand trust and



experience, positively influence brand attachment (Erci s et al., 2012; Chinomona, 2013; Chinomona and Maziriri, 2017).
  Also, brand trust affects brand purchase, loyalty, and commitment. Evidence suggests that a strong relationship exists between brand love and brand trust, brand commitment, positive word of mouth, and willingness to pay a higher price for the brand (Albert and Merunka, 2013). Research indicates that brand trust positively affects brand loyalty (Setyawan and Kussudiyarsana, 2015), directly influences brand purchase intentions (Yasin and Shamim, 2013) and positively influences current and future purchases (Erci s et al., 2012). Indeed, more than any other factor, brand trust has been identified as essential for future purchases of a brand (Esch et al., 2006). It is essential in determining purchase loyalty and attitudinal loyalty and it plays a role in brand market share (Chaudhuri and Holbrook, 2001). Brand trust affects both affective and continuance commitment and affective commitment influences repurchase intention and loyalty (Erci s et al., 2012).
  Brand quality is essential to brand trust and love. Indeed, Fournier (1998), discussed the role of brand quality in brand love and highlighted the role of trust in relationship satisfaction and strength (Fournier, 1998). Also, brand trust has been found to positively affect resistance to negative information and repurchase intention (Turgut and Gultekin, 2015).
  Brand trust is weakened by poor user experience, brand quality, brand image, and a lack of brand familiarity.
Respect and Brand Love
Brand respect is essential in brand love and plays an important role in brand attachment, intimacy, and commitment. It is influenced by brand identification, values, image, experience, and quality. Brand respect is displayed by the customer in the form of high regard, admiration for the brand, brand loyalty and consideration or tolerance of negative information. Indeed, brand familiarity positively affects brand respect (Zhou, 2017), indicating that brand familiarity increases regard for a brand. Evidence suggests that brand image positively influences brand respect and love (Cho, 2011), indicating that brand image modulates a customer's regard and admiration for a brand.
  Brand respect influences brand commitment and loyalty. Indeed, a strong relationship has been found between brand respect and brand loyalty (Cho, 2011) and brand admiration results in greater brand loyalty, stronger brand advocacy, and higher brand equity (Park et al., 2016). Brand respect affects the behavioral outcomes of brand love such as affective commitment, and willingness to pay a price premium (Garg et al., 2016; Park et al., 2016).
   Also, evidence suggests that customers' admiration or high regard for a brand contributes to why they tend to ignore negative information about the brand (Elbedweihy et al., 2016). Fournier (1998), included respect as one of the components of brand partner quality. This means that respect is one of the factors that reflects the consumer's evaluation of the brand's performance (Fournier, 1998).
   A lack of respect could negatively influence the relationship between a brand and a customer. Indeed, people react negatively when the expectation of respect is violated

(Hendrick et al., 2011) and a violation of expectation between brand and customer has been found to contribute to brand hate (Zarantonello et al., 2016).
Brand love summary
Brand love involves the interactions and synergistic interplay between respect, connection, trust, and attraction. Any event that results in the loss of any of these factors could cause brand love to gradually decline and unless effort is made to replenish it, it will eventually fade or collapse. Brand love is dynamic and requires significant investment from the brand to keep it alive.

STRENGTHS AND ADVANCES MADE BY THE QUADRUPLE THEORY
The quadruple theory builds on many of the strengths of previous theories of love and it applies a temporal approach that has been proposed as the best way to understand love (Berscheid, 2010). It goes further than previous theories for several reasons. Firstly, it could potentially be applied to any form of love although, only brand, romantic and parental love were discussed in this paper due to the paucity of scholarly articles on other forms of love. One of the reasons current love scales and approaches have been unable to be applied in all forms of love (Hendrick and Hendrick, 1989; Whitley, 1993; Sternberg, 1997; Masuda, 2003; Graham and Christiansen, 2009), is because they capture only a part of the ACC model, unlike the quadruple framework which fully captures it.
   Unlike previous theories, the quadruple theory's application of the complex factor of connection/resonance gives it an edge in furthering our understanding of love. Proximity, positive shared experience, familiarity, and similarity are vital to connection and connection has the most profound influence on all the other factors.
   Also, the dynamism and variation of these factors provide a fresh way to understand love from its development to collapse. As Figure 1 shows, love tends to take time to mature in a relationship and can die as these factors rise and decline. Figure 1 shows that variations in the presence of these factors represent different levels of love. Love in any relationship is influenced by the events in the environment it is embedded, and it responds favorably or negatively to these changes. Indeed, people get sick, old, lose their finances, travel in search of greener pastures creating distance, develop new interests different from their partner's and all these influences the presence and absence of love. One brand becomes more innovative, improves its product quality and users experience over another and people gradually love it more than the one they previously loved. In other words, love is very dynamic and may be divided into high, moderate and low. Another point highlighted in Figure 1 is that the absence of one factor represents the absence of love and only the presence of all factors represents the presence of love. Indeed, the decline of a factor can be replenished in response to changes in the environment causing the reestablishment of love. Trust could decline but attraction and respect remain and over time trust could be replenished.



  This dynamic understanding of love implies that it can be nurtured and sustained. As an example, for a brand to be loved and to maintain that love, it must make products that are attractive (appealing). It must be able to connect to its target customers by reaching out through adverts to achieve familiarity and it must ensure that its values, goals, actions are consistently similar to those of its customer base. Also, it must ensure its services and products and actions promote and maintain trust with its customers. It must respect (value) its customer's interests and ensure that its services and products continue to receive the admiration of its customers. Table 2 describes how brand love can be nurtured and preserved.
  Using this framework, a love scale or algorithm could be developed to ascertain the presence or absence of love in any relationship. Such a scale must effectively capture these four factors and must consider the type of love being calculated in its approach. As an example, in trying to create a scale for romantic love, sexual attraction, and activity may be important for attraction and connection (depending on the age of the partners) but would be unnecessary in the calculation of brand or parental love.


MAJOR CHALLENGES FOR THE THEORY
One of the biggest challenges the theory faces is the lack of psychometric data to prove many of its claims. Most of its arguments are based on decades of psychological data, but its lack of psychometric data weakens the theory significantly. Also, the entire premise of the theory is based on the ACC model, which has not been validated as essential or foundational to understanding love. Perhaps, something else needs to be added to the model that the theory may have missed. The argument

that the quadruple theory captures the ACC model better than previous theories on love is an argument that has not been validated, and it remains to be seen if this is true. Also, the argument that it can be applied to all forms of love apart from the three discussed remains to be tested and verified.

CONCLUSION
Gaps currently exist in our understanding of love and evidences from the existing literature show that a framework that can be applied to all forms of love is needed. The quadruple theory hopes to be that framework. It is likely to broaden our understanding of the complex nature of love. It could make love less complex by making it something that can be cultivated or nurtured, regulated and preserved. Future research should consider the modulatory roles of peptides, neurotransmitters, and hormones on these factors and their influence on love as well as the integrated parts of the brain that modulates all these factors and how they work synergistically in different stages of love.
  It is important to note that love is universal and applies to people of all cultures, races, ethnicities, religion and sexual orientations. Indeed, romantic love as described by the quadruple theory applies equally to heterosexual relationships and to the relationships of people in the LGTBQ community.
   In conclusion, culture has a monumental influence on what people feel, think, and how they behave toward other people and things in their environment (Karandashev, 2015; Ching Hei and David, 2018). So, it can be considered a modulating factor on the factors discussed and on love.

Conflict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Background
Cancer is an emerging public health problem in Ethiopia. A significant proportion of premature cancer deaths are preventable. The socioeconomic impact of cancer can be considerably reduced provided that effective interventions are put in place to control risk factors. Text-messaging has been currently targeted as a simple and efficient tool for providing people with health information.

Objective
To evaluate the effectiveness of mobile text messages in improving knowledge and perception on cancer and behavioral risks among college students.

Methods
Design: a single-blind, 2-arm randomized controlled trial will be used. Setting: the study will be conducted among public colleges in Dessie town, Northeast Ethiopia. Study population: students who are studying in all public colleges. Intervention: a text message related to cancer risk factors once a day for two months. Control groups will receive general health messages daily for two months. Data: Socioeconomic characteristics, health belief variables, and behavioral risk factors of cancer will be collected before and after the intervention. Text messages will be provided based on the health belief model (HBM). Primary outcomes: cancer risk knowledge score and risk perception will be measured at baseline and 6 months post-randomization. Secondary outcomes: a change in mean healthy diet score, physical activity level, alcohol intake, and tobacco use will be measured at baseline-, 3, and 6 months post-randomization. Analysis: We will compute descriptive statistics for each outcome pre and post-intervention. To test the change in knowledge and perception, paired t-test will be used. Analysis of Covariance will be used to test over group comparison.

Trial registration
ClinicalTrials.gov (https://register.clinicaltrials.gov) NCT04269018.

Introduction
Cancer is among the leading causes of premature death worldwide. In 2020, the incidence was estimated to be 19.3 million and was responsible for 10 million deaths globally [1]. Previously it was described as a disease of the high-income countries, but now it is also an important public health problem in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) [2]. Lifestyle changes, rapid urbanization, cultural transition, and an increase in life expectancy could attribute to a rise in incidence. From 2005 to 2015, the highest (10–20%) increase in the incidence of cancer was observed in the World Health Organization (WHO) African region [3, 4]. Hence, it imposes an enormous burden on the already overwhelmed health care system of LMICs.

In Ethiopia, the numbers of cancer cases were estimated to be 77,352 and were responsible for 51,865 deaths nationally in 2020 [1]. Cancers of the breast, cervix, colorectal cancer, Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), leukemia, cancers of the prostate, thyroid, lung, stomach, and liver are the most commonly occurring cancers in the country [3–5]. Despite a rise in incidence, cancer remains among the least public health priorities in Africa, mainly because of the immense burden of communicable diseases along with limited resources [6, 7].

The risk factors for cancer can be broadly categorized into four: behavioral, biological, environmental, and genetic. Behavioral risk factors include tobacco use, harmful use of alcohol, unhealthy diet, and physical inactivity [5]. These lifestyle and environmental factors are potentially modifiable if appropriate preventive interventions are implemented [8, 9]. Human behavior is a key to the etiology of cancer and presents channels for targeted and sustained intervention [5, 10]. The effect of cancer can be significantly reduced through effective interventions to improve modifiable risk factors, early detection of cases, and appropriate management and care for those with the disease [4].

The Health Belief Model (HBM) has been one of the psychosocial approaches for explaining health related behaviors and guide the design of interventions to enhance compliance with preventive procedures [11, 12]. It has six components which originated from the belief that individuals will take action to control unhealthy behaviors if they regard themselves as susceptible to the condition; if they believe that the health problem has serious consequences; if they believe that a course of action available to them would be beneficial in reducing either susceptibility or severity of the condition; if they believe that the anticipated barriers to taking the action out-weighed by its benefits; if there is stimulus needed to trigger the decision-making process to accept a recommended health action; and if they develop confidence in their ability to successfully perform a behavior. [11, 12]. In addition, HBM states that perceptions of reality influence behavior. Health behaviors are influenced by a person’s desire to avoid an unhealthy lifestyle or to get well [12, 13]. The HBM will therefore be used to develop an intervention to increase awareness of and perceived susceptibility to cancer, and affect change to four key health behaviors.

In Ethiopia cancer screening, diagnosis and management are sub-optimal and population-based data are limited to few cities [4]. Few studies in the country showed poor knowledge of risk factors and screening were identified as important factors for poor utilization of cancer screening and other prevention services [7, 14, 15]. Thus, awareness creation and behavioral intervention might address a wide variety of key processes and outcomes across the cancer control continuum from prevention to care for survivors [10]. As part of the strategy, text messages are currently considered to be the most feasible and widest-reaching mHealth intervention, as they do not require internet or any other advanced facilities [16]. Several studies indicated that text messaging interventions are effective in smoking cessation and improving physical activity [17–20]. However, the effectiveness on knowledge and behavior is not studied in the Ethiopian context. Therefore, this study aimed to measure the effectiveness of text messages to improve knowledge of behavioral risks, which could be helpful to raise cancer awareness among citizens regarding cancer issues and promote cancer prevention and control in this country. We hypothesize that mobile text messages will improve awareness and risk perception of cancer, ultimately improving risk reduction behavior. Given the demonstrated effectiveness, delivering the intervention to a larger community might significantly reduce the public health burden of this disease.

Research questions
What is the effectiveness of daily mobile text messages in improving cancer risk related knowledge and perception at 6 month compared with controls?

What is the effectiveness of daily mobile text messages in decreasing lifestyle cancer risk factors including physical inactivity, unhealthy dietary habit, smoking, and alcohol consumption at 6 month?

Trial objectives
Our study objective is to assess the effect of cancer risk specific daily mobile text messages, for early adults, on cancer risk knowledge, perception and risk reduction behaviors such as healthy dietary habit, physical activity, reduction of alcohol consumption, and quit smoking, compared to a general health message once a week.

Methods
Study design
The study will be a single-blinded, parallel-group, randomized controlled trial, which aims to recruit college students in Northeast Ethiopia. It is designed to allow for a before-after comparison of cancer risk knowledge, perception, and behavior between an intervention and a control group. The main reason to conduct a randomized study is to control for some of the important confounding variables. Once the most important variables are being adjusted, the rest residual confounders will be expected to be controlled in the randomization. The CONSORT statement was used in the design of this study and will be employed in reporting of findings [21].

Study setting
The study will be conducted in all public colleges in Dessie town, the administrative town of South Wollo, Northeast Ethiopia. It is 401 kilometers far from Addis Ababa, the capital city of Ethiopia. There are three public colleges in the city, which provides several academic and training services. All public colleges in the city will be included, namely Woizero Siheen Polytechnic College, Dessie College of Teachers Education, and Dessie Health Science college. Woizero Siheen Polytechnic College was established in 1930 and currently provides technical and vocational education and training (TVET) in 5 different campuses: Main Campus (Siheen Campus), Merho Campus, Hotie Campus, Dawdo Campus, and Menen (Vocational Campus). The College has 5,975 trainees in regular and night-shift programs. Dessie College of teacher’s education was established in 1980 and has around 1,426 students. Dessie Health Science College will not be included, as the students in this college are expected to have a higher knowledge on risks of cancer and preventive mechanisms.

Eligibility criteria
Participant’s eligibility criteria include: 1) being a student in selected public colleges; 2) aged 18 to 35 years; 3) No prior diagnosis of any type of cancer; 4) access to mobile text messaging; 5) not a student of any health science college; 7) able to provide informed consent, and 8) not enrolled in another interventional study that uses text message as a tool.

Sample size and sampling strategy
The sample size for the study was determined using the assumption of a design to demonstrate the superiority of a new intervention or text message compared to the control group in improving self-efficacy (superiority trial design), assuming a 2.9 mean difference of perceived self-efficacy to adopt healthy behavior between text message and control group, a 6.22 pooled standard deviation [22], 95% confidence level, 80% power, and an expectation of 10% loss to follow up. With a 1:1 ratio, the sample size was estimated to be 160 (80 intervention and 80 control group). The sample size will be allocated to Woizero Siheen Polytechnic College and Dessie College of teacher’s education based on proportional to the number of students. Students’ ID numbers will be obtained from the registrar’s office of each college and used as a sampling frame. Then; a simple random sampling method will be used to select study subjects.

Recruitment and randomization
Potential participants will be recruited from selected public colleges. After we gained an official letter from Wollo University, each college’s administrator and the registrar will be communicated to confirm their willingness and obtain a student list with ID number. Selected students will be requested for consent to participate in the study, and giving their phone number for delivering text messages and subsequent evaluation. After the baseline assessment, eligible participants will be randomized to either the intervention group (a daily cancer risk specific text messages) or control (a daily general health text messages) in a uniform 1:1 allocation ratio, using a computer-based randomization program. Allocation concealment will be done using SNOSE (sequentially numbered opaque, sealed envelope) technique when the students are enrolled in the study. The students’ ID no. will be put in an envelope, then the investigators will randomize the intervention group accordingly. The computer-generated sequence will be performed by a statistician, independent of the investigators (Fig 1). After the intervention, we will conduct a panel discussion (to appreciate for successful completion of the intervention and provide an appointment for end line assessment) with students in a separate room for cases and controls. Four months back after the intervention, they will receive a phone call for end line assessment.
Pancreatic cancer is often called a silent killer. It grows quietly, spreads aggressively, and resists most treatments, making it one of the deadliest cancers in the world. Scientists have long struggled to understand why this particular cancer is so ruthless. Now, groundbreaking research from the Technical University of Munich (TUM) has uncovered a chilling clue: pancreatic tumors can hijack the body’s nervous system to fuel their own growth.

In a study published in Cancer Cell, researchers led by Professor Ekin Demir have discovered that pancreatic tumors form special nerve-like connections known as “pseudosynapses.” These structures allow cancer cells to communicate directly with nerve cells, essentially tricking the body’s own electrical network into supporting the tumor. It’s as if the cancer plugs itself into the body’s wiring and starts using it for power.

The Discovery of Pseudosynapses
For decades, scientists have known that the nervous system can influence cancer development. Tumors often invade nearby nerve fibers—a phenomenon known as “neural invasion”—which usually signals an especially poor prognosis. But the new study takes this relationship to a deeper, more intimate level.

Around six years ago, American researchers studying brain tumors made a surprising discovery: some brain cancers could form their own synapses, the specialized connections neurons use to communicate. These tumor synapses allowed cancer cells to “listen in” on the brain’s electrical activity and use it to grow faster.

Professor Demir and his team wondered whether this strange mechanism could also occur outside the brain—particularly in organs where nerves are already deeply involved in regulating function. The pancreas was an ideal candidate. It is richly connected to the nervous system and known for frequent neural invasion by tumors.

Seeing the Invisible: Searching for Tumor Synapses
The TUM researchers began their search by studying pancreatic tumor tissue under high-resolution microscopes. They were looking for the molecular fingerprints of synapses—clusters of receptors that respond to neurotransmitters, the chemical messengers of the nervous system.

Their investigation paid off. In several samples, the scientists found unusually high concentrations of NMDA receptors—proteins that bind to glutamate, a neurotransmitter that plays a vital role in learning and memory in the brain. The presence of these receptors hinted that something extraordinary was happening.

When the team examined the tissue under an electron microscope, they saw tiny structures resembling synapses. These connections were not identical to true neuronal synapses but were close enough to perform a similar function. Because of their subtle structural differences, the researchers named them “pseudosynapses.”

These pseudosynapses, it turned out, were the cancer’s secret weapon.

How Cancer Exploits the Nervous System
The pancreas, like other glands, normally responds to signals from the nervous system to regulate its function. Under healthy conditions, glutamate molecules released by nerve cells bind to NMDA receptors on pancreatic cells, triggering a wave of calcium ions to enter the cell. This calcium flow sets off a chain reaction of signals that control normal cell activity.

Pancreatic tumors appear to have stolen this mechanism for their own advantage. When glutamate binds to NMDA receptors on cancer cells, it opens a channel that allows calcium to flood in. This influx sets off molecular signaling cascades that push the cancer cells to grow, divide, and spread.

Professor Demir describes it this way: “When glutamate binds to the cancer cells’ NMDA receptors, a channel opens and calcium flows into the cell. This influx triggers molecular signaling cascades that drive tumor growth and metastasis.”

The researchers noticed that these cancer-induced calcium waves were slow and long-lasting—very different from the quick bursts seen in normal nerve signaling. The sustained waves may help explain why pancreatic tumors are so persistent and aggressive.

Turning Discovery into Hope
While this discovery highlights how cunning cancer can be, it also points to a potential vulnerability. If tumors depend on these pseudosynapses and NMDA receptors for growth, then blocking this communication could slow or even stop the disease.

In experiments with mice, the TUM team tested drugs that inhibit NMDA receptors. The results were promising: the tumors grew more slowly, spread less often, and the animals lived longer.

This breakthrough opens the door to new therapies that target the interaction between nerves and cancer cells—a frontier that has barely been explored in oncology.

“We are currently using bioinformatic methods to identify approved drugs that, in addition to their primary effects, can also block these specific NMDA receptors in pancreatic cancer cells,” says Professor Demir. “Therapies targeting the interface between the nervous system and tumors could open up entirely new treatment options.”

Such drugs might not only treat pancreatic cancer but also other types of tumors that exploit the same nerve-based mechanisms.

A Broader Implication: When Cancer Talks to the Brain
The discovery that tumors can form pseudosynapses challenges how we think about cancer as a disease. Traditionally, we view tumors as isolated masses of rogue cells. But this research suggests that cancers may be integrated into the body’s own communication networks—using neurotransmitters, hijacking nerve signals, and reshaping normal physiology to favor their survival.

In other words, cancer may not only feed on nutrients and blood—it may also feed on information. By forming pseudosynapses, pancreatic tumors become active participants in the nervous system, blurring the line between body and disease.

This revelation could change how we approach treatment. Instead of targeting cancer cells alone, future therapies may focus on the “conversation” between the tumor and the body’s nerves—interrupting the chemical dialogue that fuels disease.

The Human Side of Discovery
Behind the technical language and microscopic details lies a story of human hope. Pancreatic cancer currently has one of the lowest survival rates of any cancer, partly because it is often detected too late and resists standard treatments like chemotherapy. For patients and their families, even small advances bring immense promise.

The discovery of pseudosynapses doesn’t just deepen our understanding—it opens a path forward. It suggests that hidden within the body’s own systems may lie keys to stopping the most untreatable cancers.

By understanding how tumors manipulate neural communication, scientists may one day silence the messages that drive them—and in doing so, give patients time, healing, and life.

The Next Chapter in Cancer Science
The TUM team’s findings mark a significant leap in the rapidly growing field of “cancer neuroscience,” which explores the connections between tumors and the nervous system. The idea that cancer cells might “talk” to neurons was once unthinkable, yet it is now reshaping scientific understanding across multiple cancers, from brain tumors to prostate and breast cancers.

The researchers believe that pseudosynapses could be more widespread than previously imagined. If other tumor types are found to use the same strategy, this mechanism could represent a universal vulnerability—one that scientists can exploit to design more precise, nerve-targeted cancer therapies.

As research continues, one thing becomes clear: the boundary between the nervous system and cancer is not as firm as once thought. Within that blurred line lies both danger and opportunity—the danger of cancer’s cunning adaptability, and the opportunity to outsmart it with science.

More information: Lei Ren et al, Sensory neurons drive pancreatic cancer progression through glutamatergic neuron-cancer pseudo-synapses, Cancer Cell (2025). DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2025.09.003

A touring exhibit that looks deep into the past to explain how humankind evolved over millennia has found welcome homes in libraries and seminaries across the United States.

Presented by the American Library Association (ALA) in collaboration with the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History’s (NMNH) Human Origins Program, Exploring Human Origins: What Does It Mean to Be Human? creates opportunities for audiences across a wide spectrum—from those who do not question the scientific study of human origins to those who are troubled by its findings—to engage the complexities of human evolution research in ways that are understandable, fulfilling, captivating, and relevant.

The exhibition hopes to create a respectful and welcoming atmosphere for the public to explore how, when, and where human qualities emerged, with experts from the NMNH Human Origins Program presenting in-person or virtually at the participating stops. The 1,200-square-foot exhibition includes more than 40 educational panels, interactive kiosks, hands-on displays, videos, 3-D skull casts, and presentations representing groundbreaking research in the scientific study of human origins.

The exhibition, which debuted in 2015, is based on the iconic David H. Koch Hall of Human Origins at the National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C. The current iteration has been traveling the U.S. since December 2023 and will conclude in July 2026. Six public libraries were selected to present the exhibition in their communities for a period of six to nine weeks, in addition to six seminaries.

“This exhibition is all about integrating scientific discoveries from around the globe and making them available for everyone to see,” said Rick Potts, director of the Smithsonian’s Human Origins Program and curator of the traveling exhibition, in 2015. “We hope that it will spark a respectful and positive conversation across the country about what it means to be human and inspire people to contemplate their place in the natural world.”

Last week I was flying across cities because of office work and this time, I was accompanied by Daryl L. Scott’s debut novel The Andronaut’s Journey.

Daryl L. Scott is a tech innovator turned author who’s spent his life riding the waves of technological change, from the days of programmable calculators to the dawn of Artificial Intelligence. He’s led teams building early PDAs, voice applications, and cutting-edge mobile platforms, leaving his mark across industries from marketing to business intelligence. Now, he’s bringing that same curiosity and insight to fiction, weaving his years of tech experience into stories that explore where innovation might take us next.

I’ve spent most of my adult life devouring science fiction, the plots that take you light-years away from your living room couch or in this case, your airplane seat. Give me a beat-up spaceship, a crew with trust issues, a healthy dose of AI and a mission that could go sideways at any moment, and I’m home.

But having robots as protagonists, I’m not too sure. They always felt too calculated, and so… well, robotic. Of course, I enjoyed I, Robot as a teenager and found Ex Machina unsettling in all the right ways, yet I’d say, I fall on the side of those who see robotics as a support system, the ones that don’t see them going rogue.

So when Daryl L. Scott himself handed me a copy of The Andronaut’s Journey, I wasn’t sure what to expect.

I opened the book on a cross-country flight. The total time for my round trip was about four and a half hours, and with a few extra reading sessions here and there, I managed to finish it in less than a week.

Zaylen-1: More Than Just a Machine
Scott doesn’t waste time with preamble. Within the first chapter, we’re on the starship Novara, orbiting a dying dwarf planet called Kelvadra that’s literally tearing itself apart. Earth is on the brink of environmental collapse, energy wars are brewing, and humanity’s last hope is a rare isotope called Tridisiom that exists on this volatile world.

This is the kind of setup that can make anyone’s pulse quicken. Remember that scene in Interstellar, when the crew lands on Miller, the water planet orbiting Gargantua and every distant wave feels like a ticking clock counting down their chances of survival? That’s the kind of tension I live for and Scott delivered plenty of it.

Right at the beginning we are introduced to Zaylen-1, the first of the Zaylen Series Andronauts. He’s covered in synthetic skin that makes him look almost human, equipped with advanced AI, and designed to think independently. He’s genuinely trying to understand what it means to work alongside humans and to be valued by them.

This reminds me of Isaac Asimov’s The Positronic Man, where Andrew spent two centuries legally fighting for human status and Data pursued an idealized version of humanity, Scott does something different. Zaylen doesn’t want to become human. He wants humans to expand their definition of personhood to include beings like him. It’s less about transformation and more about recognition, and that distinction matters.

A Spacewalk That Sets Everything in Motion
There’s this scene that hooked me completely. It’s early in the book, and Zaylen is on his first spacewalk with Commander Elara Thorne to repair the Novara’s damaged communications array. The planet below them is stunning and terrifying, a patchwork of rich ochres, deep blues, and vibrant greens with swirling lavender and magenta atmosphere. They’re working fast because Kelvadra’s volcanic activity is ramping up, and every now and then there is some wave of debris hits.

The way Scott describes space work is perfection.There’s the precision required for every movement, the casual expertise of someone like Elara who’s done this a hundred times paired against Zaylen’s hyper-analytical approach. And then, in a heartbeat, everything changes.

Zaylen spots a reflection in Elara’s helmet, a rock fragment growing exponentially larger with each passing second. Without hesitation, he lunges toward her, tackles her out of the path, and takes the impact himself. The fragment tears off his right arm, peels away his synthetic skin, and leaves him spinning helplessly with green nano-fluids leaking into space.

The scene is visceral and heartstopping. But what got me wasn’t just the action (though Scott choreographs it beautifully). It was the aftermath. Zaylen, mangled and leaking, his chrome infrastructure exposed, apologizes to Elara for looking “ugly and shocking”.

An android worried about aesthetics while his systems are failing? That moment of vulnerability, so human in its insecurity, completely dismantled my defenses.

This is the kind of set-piece that reminds me of the airlock sequence in the Spinning Gimbal a.k.a docking scene in Interstellar. It’s thrilling, yes, but it’s also character-defining. Zaylen saved a human life without calculation or hesitation. And yet, as we’ll see, that act of heroism becomes evidence against him when things go wrong.

Last week I was flying across cities because of office work and this time, I was accompanied by Daryl L. Scott’s debut novel The Andronaut’s Journey.

Daryl L. Scott is a tech innovator turned author who’s spent his life riding the waves of technological change, from the days of programmable calculators to the dawn of Artificial Intelligence. He’s led teams building early PDAs, voice applications, and cutting-edge mobile platforms, leaving his mark across industries from marketing to business intelligence. Now, he’s bringing that same curiosity and insight to fiction, weaving his years of tech experience into stories that explore where innovation might take us next.

I’ve spent most of my adult life devouring science fiction, the plots that take you light-years away from your living room couch or in this case, your airplane seat. Give me a beat-up spaceship, a crew with trust issues, a healthy dose of AI and a mission that could go sideways at any moment, and I’m home.

But having robots as protagonists, I’m not too sure. They always felt too calculated, and so… well, robotic. Of course, I enjoyed I, Robot as a teenager and found Ex Machina unsettling in all the right ways, yet I’d say, I fall on the side of those who see robotics as a support system, the ones that don’t see them going rogue.

So when Daryl L. Scott himself handed me a copy of The Andronaut’s Journey, I wasn’t sure what to expect.

I opened the book on a cross-country flight. The total time for my round trip was about four and a half hours, and with a few extra reading sessions here and there, I managed to finish it in less than a week.

Zaylen-1: More Than Just a Machine
Scott doesn’t waste time with preamble. Within the first chapter, we’re on the starship Novara, orbiting a dying dwarf planet called Kelvadra that’s literally tearing itself apart. Earth is on the brink of environmental collapse, energy wars are brewing, and humanity’s last hope is a rare isotope called Tridisiom that exists on this volatile world.

This is the kind of setup that can make anyone’s pulse quicken. Remember that scene in Interstellar, when the crew lands on Miller, the water planet orbiting Gargantua and every distant wave feels like a ticking clock counting down their chances of survival? That’s the kind of tension I live for and Scott delivered plenty of it.

Right at the beginning we are introduced to Zaylen-1, the first of the Zaylen Series Andronauts. He’s covered in synthetic skin that makes him look almost human, equipped with advanced AI, and designed to think independently. He’s genuinely trying to understand what it means to work alongside humans and to be valued by them.

This reminds me of Isaac Asimov’s The Positronic Man, where Andrew spent two centuries legally fighting for human status and Data pursued an idealized version of humanity, Scott does something different. Zaylen doesn’t want to become human. He wants humans to expand their definition of personhood to include beings like him. It’s less about transformation and more about recognition, and that distinction matters.

A Spacewalk That Sets Everything in Motion
There’s this scene that hooked me completely. It’s early in the book, and Zaylen is on his first spacewalk with Commander Elara Thorne to repair the Novara’s damaged communications array. The planet below them is stunning and terrifying, a patchwork of rich ochres, deep blues, and vibrant greens with swirling lavender and magenta atmosphere. They’re working fast because Kelvadra’s volcanic activity is ramping up, and every now and then there is some wave of debris hits.

The way Scott describes space work is perfection.There’s the precision required for every movement, the casual expertise of someone like Elara who’s done this a hundred times paired against Zaylen’s hyper-analytical approach. And then, in a heartbeat, everything changes.

Zaylen spots a reflection in Elara’s helmet, a rock fragment growing exponentially larger with each passing second. Without hesitation, he lunges toward her, tackles her out of the path, and takes the impact himself. The fragment tears off his right arm, peels away his synthetic skin, and leaves him spinning helplessly with green nano-fluids leaking into space.

The scene is visceral and heartstopping. But what got me wasn’t just the action (though Scott choreographs it beautifully). It was the aftermath. Zaylen, mangled and leaking, his chrome infrastructure exposed, apologizes to Elara for looking “ugly and shocking”.

An android worried about aesthetics while his systems are failing? That moment of vulnerability, so human in its insecurity, completely dismantled my defenses.

This is the kind of set-piece that reminds me of the airlock sequence in the Spinning Gimbal a.k.a docking scene in Interstellar. It’s thrilling, yes, but it’s also character-defining. Zaylen saved a human life without calculation or hesitation. And yet, as we’ll see, that act of heroism becomes evidence against him when things go wrong.

Abstract
Disasters are commonly experienced as major devastating events that exceed the resources of an agency to respond, with effects emanating throughout a community or region. There are, however, those events that are more measured, more subtle, and with few actual deaths, which still distract investigators from their daily duties and routines and project long lasting and crippling effects to a community or nation. Disasters can occur from natural forces or be the result of human activity. Most forensic pathologists who practice over a significant time will encounter one or the other types of disaster, sometimes more than a few. In my own career, I have witnessed large-scale disasters, such as hundreds of deaths occurring as the result of a major heat wave, to small-scale disasters such as factory explosions or small airplane crashes at sea—each with their own challenges. In addition to the extent of the initial disaster, many require the detailed, exhaustive evidentiary recovery and examination of a crime scene. The Jeffrey Dahmer case, although only involving 11 actual victims, required a major disaster response, and continues to influence and affect a community over 25 years later.

Keywords: Forensic pathology, Jeffrey Dahmer, Serial murder, Serial killer

Introduction
Many individuals think of disasters as large scale events that result in numerous fatalities; however, disasters can occur on a smaller scale and still have profound effects on the community at large and, in particular, the investigators responsible for dealing with the aftermath. The social science literature suggests that disasters, in addition to demonstrating a community's preparedness, also reflect the realities of social isolation, economic inequalities, and failures of political will (1). The Jeffrey Dahmer case, although only involving 11 actual victims, required a major disaster response, exposing the capacity to respond to and investigate a major crime that continues to influence and affect a community over 25 years later. The Jeffrey Dahmer case presented unusual dynamics due to the nature of the murders, intense media coverage, and sexual orientation of many of the victims. The majority of the victims were homosexual and had been reported missing by their families for many weeks to months. The media published the grim details of the murders and methods of disposal. The trial was followed closely and watched around the world.

Discussion
The Scene
On July 23, 1991, personnel from the Milwaukee Police Department encountered a naked man in handcuffs running in the street. The individual escorted the officers to Jeffrey Dahmer's apartment, where the victim alleged he had been drugged and assaulted. After officers gained access to the residence, Dahmer was quickly taken into custody. The victim showed the officers the decapitated head of male in the refrigerator he had previously seen and a full criminal investigation commenced (2).

Personnel from the Milwaukee County medical examiner's office responded to the scene. Per established routine, medical examiner personnel worked closely with the Milwaukee police department independently photographing and documenting the scene and its evidence. Within the restricted crime scene, the dining room area contained recently purchased hardware implements such as tape, a hammer, handsaw, and an electrical drill in the bedroom. They also encountered numerous human body parts including seven skulls, three of which were painted. There were four intact human heads, one dissected postcranial skeleton in a portable freezer, and three partially skeletonized bodies in a 55-gallon drum. The freezer compartment of the refrigerator contained what was later identified as a human heart and large muscle filets packaged in plastic bags. Other evidence, including large boxes of muriatic acid, degreasing solvents, Polaroid photographs of victims (both alive and in various states of dissection), desiccated male genitals, and hands were recovered (Image 1).

Image 1.
Image 1

Open in a new tab
Kitchen and dining area of the apartment shows the muriactic acid and degreaser agents. Polariod photos of victims are on top of the portable freezer. The kitchen contained no food material.

Scene photographs were essential, not only for the documentation of the initial scene, but in the continual review and analysis of the evidence over time. By their very nature, disasters have a way of dulling the senses of even the most experienced investigators, creating a “fog-of-war,” where the ability of the investigator to comprehend the meaning and significance of evidence, including time and space, can be clouded. For example, the kitchen had no food material—only a can of Crisco grease—which supported later allegations of cannibalism. There was a large art deco table with a large fish tank. Photographs found elsewhere in the apartment showed Dahmer had documented numerous victims that had been posed on the table prior to, during, and after dismemberment (Image 2). Desiccated male genitalia, scalp hair, hands, and skulls supported the fact that they were retained as “souvenirs” in a typical pattern of an organized serial killer (Image 3) (3).

Image 2.
Image 2

Open in a new tab
Dahmer recreated the photograph over the black table by posing his victims on the table and taking their picture for souvenirs.

Image 3.
Image 3

Open in a new tab
The hall closet containing cholorform and ether bottles Dahmer used to sedated and kill his victims. Note the cleaned skulls and cooking pot that contained human body parts as souvenirs.

The evaluation of the scene allowed investigators to establish methods of death, begin the preliminary identification process, and demonstrate the deteriorating mental capacity of the assailant. Forensic pathologists assisted with the identification, established the cause of death, and documented injuries that allowed investigators to question Dahmer on various injuries he inflicted upon his victims. Anthropological examination assisted with the identification and also resulted in the establishment of victim profiles.

Autopsy Findings
Forensic pathologists initially analyzed the body parts and skeletons recovered at the scene. The portable freezer contained, in addition to a decapitated frozen head, defleshed bones and 3480 g of tissue cut in to irregular, square pieces not exceeding 15 cm. The 55-gallon drum contained four decomposing skeletons, which could be approximated using the variable dissection planes of dismemberment. The cleaned, postcranial skeleton could be matched to a skull by the unique atlanto-occipital joints identified by the anthropologist.

The paint was removed from the defleshed skulls, which revealed the presence of holes drilled into the frontal regions of the skull. The skulls contained two, three, and four holes. Examination of the frozen skull revealed the presence of a single hole surrounded by faint, periosteal hemorrhage. The cranium was opened and the brain examined. There was a hemorrhagic wound track through the brain that demonstrated microscopic, organizing inflammation and endothelia inflammation a distance from the wound. These findings indicated a healing injury of some duration inflicted while the victim was alive.

These autopsy findings were communicated to Dahmer through the detective. Dahmer reluctantly admitted that he had attempted to create “zombie sex-slaves” by drilling the skulls and injecting acids and other materials (4). It appeared to investigators that Dahmer was experimenting to obtain optimal results by “lobotomizing” his victims with a series of a decreasing number of drill holes (Image 4).

Image 4.
Image 4

Open in a new tab
Two cleaned skulls, one with four drilled holes used to infuse acid into the brain. Below the skulls is a briefcase containing Polaroid pictures of all his vicitms.

Psychological Analysis
The detailed scene investigation and autopsy examination allowed for evaluation of Dahmer's motives, methods, and mental state over the months leading to his capture. In this unique situation, Dahmer freely discussed his role in the murders with law enforcement and provided a valuable resource for collaboration of scene, anthropological, and autopsy findings to forensic pathologists, forensic psychiatrists, and law enforcement personal during the investigation. Scene investigation and autopsy analysis of the bodies provided prosecutors with detailed evidence of the motives and psychological state of Dahmer during the course of a death spree that lasted nine months.

A forensic psychiatrist constructed Dahmer's psychological profile characterized by a destructive behavior in which his collection of fetishistic memorabilia provided an expression of his deep ambivalence and mixed hostility towards his victims. Frustrated with his sexual immaturity and continual rejection, Dahmer channeled his hostility into a sadistic sexual behavior characteristic of the psychopathology of a serial killer (5).

Dahmer was a controlled, organized serial killer who manifested all of the phases of a serial killer. He selected his victims by trolling local bars. He posed his victims before, during, and after death. He retained souvenirs of his victim's body parts and photographs. The accelerated rate of the killings, accumulation of bodies, and need for additional storage containers demonstrated that Dahmer was becoming increasingly disorganized psychologically and in his methods of killing and disposal (Figure 1).

Figure 1.
Figure 1

Open in a new tab
The chronology of the murders demonstrates an increasing frequency and loss of control. Victims were eight black males, one Asian male, and one White male, ages 14-33.

Identification
Unlike some major disasters, those of a more limited nature may have an established manifest of names and identities. Antemortem dental records, fingerprints, and other identifying records were rapidly recovered or already on file. Dahmer's retention of some of the victims' identification at the scene facilitated the process. Of the 11 victim remains recovered from Dahmer's apartment, four could be identified with fingerprints and all of the identifications were confirmed by dental comparison. In 1991, the use of DNA for routine identification was years away for the average medical examiner office. Nonetheless, the victims were all identified within three days using a combination of fingerprints and dental records readily available to the investigators (4).

The majority of victims were African-American males in their 20s and 30s. Anthropological examination confirmed similarities in craniofacial and stature measurements, which suggested that Dahmer had a fetish and desired a certain body type (5).

Media and Family Relations
In addition to the usual crush of media attention that accompanies a mass casualty incident, two days into the investigation, local citizens accused the Milwaukee Police Department of criminal indifference by allowing one of the victims, 14-year-old Konarack Sinthasomaphon, to be returned to Dahmer and later murdered. Dahmer had convinced police that the dispute was over a homosexual lovers' quarrel and that Konarack was 19-years-old. The citizens group charged it was the officer's insensitivity to the gay community that allowed Dahmer to escape arrest and continue his killing spree. This only added to the chaos of the disaster, distraction of investigators, and allegations of neglect of law enforcement (6).

Conclusion
In addition to the overwhelming chaos disaster investigators routinely confront, in the Jeffrey Dahmer case, they also encountered a complex crime scene. A unique factor in the investigation was Dahmer's willingness to cooperate with law enforcement investigators in answering questions related to the manner and methods of killing, disposal of the bodies, and artifacts noted at the scene and autopsy.

The multidisciplinary investigation that followed provided investigators with a number of conclusions that permitted the successful prosecution and conviction of Jeffrey Dahmer. Dahmer drugged, strangled, and dismembered his victims following his use of “chemical” restraints. Forensic autopsies demonstrated the organized methods of death, experimental lobotomies, postmortem dissection, and disposition. Anthropological analysis suggested Dahmer was psychologically attracted to a certain anthropometric body type. He experimented with a method of injecting caustic material in the brains of his victims to sedate and pacify them into helpless “zombies.” Materials recovered from the science confirmed the methods of an “organized” serial killer with souvenir taking to enhance sexual pleasure. An examination of the chronology of death revealed a pattern of increasing frequency of the murders and the impression that Dahmer was becoming increasingly disorganized and out of control (7).

Limited mass casualty incidents generally do not require the use of state and federal disaster resources and can be handled at a local level. The identities of the victims are usually known and quickly confirmed. However, even the most limited incident carries with it a search for the causes and punishment of those responsible. In some cases, comingling of the remains of victims and those responsible may add to the anguish of the families. In any operation, investigators encounter numerous obstacles in processing a disaster. Concerns and demands of families, allegations of mismanagement, intense and urgent media requests, and an unrealistic expectation add to the stress of managing the disaster. In the Dahmer case, allegations of police indifference and threatened lawsuits only added to the political and social pressure on the investigation. In many disasters, including those with a limited number of victims, investigators face challenges in resources, personnel, expertise, and patience.

No matter the size or extent of a disaster, the forensic pathologist must anticipate that the death investigation may have criminal and civil implications requiring detailed death investigation. Cooperation among investigating agencies is a must for proper and rapid identification, determination of cause and manner of death, disposition of the remains to the family, and to manage an appropriate media response.

Footnotes
ETHICAL APPROVAL

As per Journal Policies, ethical approval was not required for this manuscript

STATEMENT OF HUMAN AND ANIMAL RIGHTS

This article does not contain any studies conducted with animals or on living human subjects

STATEMENT OF INFORMED CONSENT

No identifiable personal data were presented in this manuscsript

DISCLOSURES & DECLARATION OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

The authors, reviewers, editors, and publication staff do not report any relevant conflicts of interest

FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE The authors have indicated that they do not have financial relationships to disclose that are relevant to this manuscript

Randomness, Luck, Astragali and Dice
In the time before the mathematical idea of randomness was discovered, people thought that everything that happened was part of the will of supernatural beings, the gods, who looked down upon human affairs and decided to 'tip the balance' one way or another to influence events. Hence, sacrifices were made and rituals performed to discover the 'will of the gods' or to try to influence human affairs. This idea still prevails, and many people all over the world use lucky charms, engage in superstitious practices, use horoscopes, and still have some kind of belief that there are such ways of influencing their lives. The gods may be dead, but 'Lady Luck' still survives.

The astragalus is a small bone, about an inch cube, found in the heel of hoofed mammals. Astragali have six sides but are not symmetrical, so there is no way of knowing which way they will eventually come to rest. For many ancient civilizations, astragali were used by priests to discover the opinions of their gods. It was customary in divination rites to roll, or cast, five astragali. Typically, each possible configuration was associated with the name of a god and carried with it the sought-after advice.

 

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
Astragali from the heel of a sheep showing the four positions of rest.
The small one in the foreground is made from pottery
 
Showing the four positions of rest. The small one in the foreground is made from pottery. Astragali found in excavations typically have their sides numbered or engraved. They were also used in board games in the First Dynasty in Egypt, c 3500 BCE; archaeological evidence consists of boards, counters, and astragali for various games, including one similar to Snakes and Ladders, still popular today.
 
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
The game of Hounds and Jackals dating from 1800 BCE found in an Egyptian tomb
 

The astragali have been used from classical times for gambling, and similar stones are still in use today for games like 'fivestones' or 'jacks'.

 

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
Die A
 

Gradually, over thousands of years, astragali were replace by dice [see note 1 below], and pottery dice have been found in Egyptian tombs. The earliest die known was made from pottery and excavated in Northern Iraq dating from about 3,000 BCE. It has dots arranged as in (Die A).
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
Die B
 

Die (B), from about 1400 BCE found in a tomb in Egypt, shows consecutive numbers opposite each other.
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
Die C
 

Dice with other markings like the names or portraits of gods have been found, probably used for special games or rituals, and others where some numbers are repeated, or 'loaded', for special purposes or possibly for cheating (Die C).


Once the Greeks had worked out the geometry of the polyhedra, dice of other shapes began to be constructed. However, whether cube or polyhedral, the shapes were not entirely regular and were therefore biased.

Over time, gamblers would get used to using the same dice, and have an intuitive idea of how they would fall, but given another set of dice, the odds would be different. Later, as the manufacture of dice became more exact, some ideas of the possible combinations of number began to emerge.

 

The Earth and The Cosmos
There were many other forms of rituals hoping to overcome the randomness of nature and man's condition. A few of these which became of particular mathematical interest are geomancy, the nine square grid or magic square, and temple designs, the ancestors of board games.

 

Geomancy
Geomancy means divination of or by the earth , and is a system of 16 mathematically related arrangements of stones, beans or other available small objects used to make decisions, answer questions, or foretell the future. The stones are cast upon the ground and the pattern formed is interpreted. The symbols represent a series of binary 'opposites' like good and evil, male or female, sadness and happiness, etc. Combinations of these opposites can be used to represent odd and even numbers.

 

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
The sixteen figures of the Geomancy system of Divination. The headings of the columns are: "The greater fortune" and "The lesser fortune". From a Book of Occult Philosophy published 1655. Notice that each pair of shapes are associated with the traditional signs for the planets and that each configuration could be interpreted from the throws of two dice.
 

As in all methods of divination, each of these figures has a number of interpretations depending on its relation to other figures shown, and many other circumstances like the time of day, the weather, and the kind of person who is asking the question.


The Grid of Nine Squares
The Nine square grid is said to come from an ancient system for the division of land, probably from feudal India. In China the nine-square configuration was supposed to be an ideal arrangement, with eight farmers' fields surrounding a central well. The grid of nine squares, or a circle divided into nine sections by straight lines often appears as a central form in Tibetan sacred diagrams. In Scotland, the pattern was used at Beltane (the eve of May) where eight squares were cut out from the turf, and a bonfire lit on the central square.

In this way, from practical beginnings in different cultures, the nine-square grid acquired mystic importance and symbolised divine order, and the representation of control by the gods.

Magic Squares are directly related to the Sacred Grid, supposedly being the numerical mystery which underlies their physical form. The simplest magic square is the square of nine, ascribed to Saturn, where each row and column adds up to 15; the total of the rows and the columns is 45, and the diagonals 30. The 4x4 square with row and column numbers 34 is assigned to Jupiter, the 5x5 with row or column numbers 65 to Mars, and so on for the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the 9x9 square with row or column numbers 369, to the Moon [an NRICH article on Magic Squares can be found here at nrich.maths.org/1337].

As with other devices, these magic squares are all said to have correspondences to different numbers, various deities, days of the week, natural objects, different qualities, and so on. In the Hindu Temple Yantra [see note 2 below] you can see the nine squares, the 'sacred space', or source of energy, in the centre.

 

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
This is a Yantra from a Hindu Temple. Yantras (or Mandalas) are used as a focus for mystical contemplation and often for the basis of design for a temple. This one is based on a 5 x 5 square, with the 'sacred space' of the 3 x 3 square in the centre.
 

Board Games are clearly linked with divination, astrology and sacred geometry, and the designs of the boards can show their sacred or occult origins. The popular game of 'snakes and ladders' is controlled by the throw of dice, and the ladders and snakes originally referring to good and bad fortune, now refer to good and bad 'luck' in the progress of the game. In some cases the designs of the boards are the same as the plans of temples and holy cities with a 'sacred space' in the centre.



Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
This is the board for the ancient Korean game of 'Yut' or 'Nyout' The board can be made of cloth or paper, or can be drawn on the floor. It is played with four 'Yut Sticks' of semi-circular section, and the way they fall determines the move of a token. The shape can be square or circular and represents the division of the world into twenty outer regions and nine central spaces.
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
The game of 'Nine Men's Morris' is played with counters on the dots on this board. The design is said to represent the four elements, (earth, air, fire and water) the four winds, or the four cardinal points of the compass, and the central sacred area was a symbol of rebirth or renewal.
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
The game was supposed to have originated in Egypt, and was known to the Romans. This is a picture from the 13th century of the game being played in England.
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
This is a traditional diagram used for the Horoscope of Robert Burton from his tomb in Christchurch in Oxford. This clearly has a link with the diagrams from sacred architecture and board games.



Mathematics and Magic
In ancient times, few people could understand even the simplest arithmetic and geometry, and the confusion of mathematics with magic has a long history.

People who had knowledge of the regular movements of the heavens were able to predict the position of planets, and the particular the times when astronomical events appeared in certain sections of the sky. In ancient civilisations these were highly skilled technicians, called 'priests', and their activities were partly scientific, and partly religious. In Europe, after the arrival of Christianity, the religious aspect of these practices was condemned as superstition. Because numbers were used in these processes, anyone who used numbers was regarded with considerable suspicion. In this way genuine mathematicians were looked upon with suspicion by the ignorant, and the titles of Astrologer, Mathematician and Conjurer were virtually synonymous.

An early Bishop of the Church, St. Augustine of Hippo (354-430 CE) once said:

"The good Christian should beware of mathematicians and all those who make empty prophecies. The danger already exists that mathematicians have made a covenant with the devil to darken the spirit and confine man in the bonds of Hell."

Augustine was arguing that belief in astrology denies the freedom of the will.

 

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
 

Roger Bacon (1214 - 1292), often called England's first Scientist, had a reputation as a 'great necromancer' because of his ingenious experiments and John Dee (1527 - 1609) probably one of the foremost mathematicians in Europe of his time, gained a reputation as a 'Conjuror' while he was at Oxford because he was respnsible for developing a simple mechanical device by which an actor appeared to fly, and people claimed he was in league with the devil. [see note 3 below]                                 

                                                                                          John Dee

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
              
 

 

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
 
Robert Recorde
 
During the sixteenth century in England, mathematicians like Robert Recorde (1510-1558) and Thomas Digges (1546-1595) published many works showing the everyday practical usefulness of mathematical knowledge for ordinary people clearly showing that mathematics was not an occult practice
                                                                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
Following the foundation of the Oxford chairs in mathematics and astronomy in 1619, some parents kept their sons away from the university in fear of them becoming contaminated by the 'Black Art'.



As the predictive power of astronomy and other practical uses of mathematics became apparent, mathematicians were able to dispel the idea that many events were not controlled by the goddess Fortuna, but could be explained in a rational way.

 
 
This is the title page of Robert Recorde's The Castle of Knowledge published in 1556. It is his fourth book for the self-education of craftsmen and artisans and shows how to make the instruments for astronomy and navigation. The blind goddess Fortuna stands on the unstable sphere holding the wheel of chance, while the Spirit of Knowledge stands on a stable cube holding the navigator's dividers and the sphere of destiny.
 
 
 
The Beginnings of Probability
Since dice were used in gambling, in religious ceremonies and for divination, it is believed that those who used the dice had a good intuitive idea of the likely frequency of various number combinations. The first printed document showing the possibilities with three dice was the Latin poem De Vetula , which shows all the combinations for the fall of three dice, and is believed to have been written in the early 13th century. The idea of using binomial coefficients to calculate the possibilities appears in the poem, but is not taken up until much later [see note 4 below].

Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
Part of the poem De Vetula written in the 13th century, shows the different combinations of three dice. Notice the written numerals on the left of the text.The written numerals for the number combinations appear to the left of the poem.
 
 
 
 
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
(1501- 1576)
Girolamo Cardano
Since the Christian Church was against gaming, and there was much superstition about divination, it is not surprising that a theory of probability did not begin to appear until the 16th century. Cardano, writing with considerable personal knowledge of gambling, recognised that if the die was honest, each face would have an equal chance of appearing. His manuscript, Liber De Ludo Aleae , was written about 1526 but only found after his death, and not published until 1663. He gave tables of the results for one, two and three dice, but these are not all correct. However, Cardano is credited with recognising that the abstraction of the 'honest die' is the key to a theory of probability based on mathematical principles.


Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
Nicolo Tartaglia (1500-1557)Tartaglia (1500 - 1557) and others discuss various versions of the division of the stakes when a gambling game is stopped, called the 'problem of points', and this shows that Cardano's ideas were likely to be common knowledge among scholars of the later 16th and early 17th century.



Galileo (1564 - 1642) wrote on probability but his work was not published until1718. He stated that with three dice there can only be one way of obtaining a 3 (1,1,1) and an 18 (6,6,6) but there are three combinations for obtaining a 6 (4,2,1), (3,2,1) and (2,2,2) which can occur in different orders making 10 possibilites and four combinations for a 7 (5,1,1),  (4,2,1), (3,3,1) and (3,2,2) which lead to fifteen possibilities. However, although 9 and 12 could be made up in the same number of ways as 10 and 11, from their experience, gamblers claimed that the occurrence of 10 and 11 were more likely! Galileo showed that the total number of possible throws with three dice are 216, and he gave a table of the number of possible throws for a total of 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4 and 3, showing that the throws for 11 to 18 were symmetrical with these. In this way he showed that there were 27 possible throws to obtain a 10, and 25 for a 9.
Image
From A Random World to a Rational Universe
This is a copy of the table Galileo published in his Sopra le Scoperte de I Dadi (Concerning an Investigation on Dice). Here he shows clearly how to count the different combinations of the various throws.
 

His work showed that by this time there was no doubt about the general method for calculating chances with a die, and it was clear that the mathematical concepts of the equal probability of the throw of a die, and the procedures to analyse the results were well known.
 
Pascal's Triangle
By the mid 16th century the theory of probability became established on a rigorous basis with the work of Pascal and Fermat. However, as we have seen, the idea of the application of 'Pascal's Triangle' had been suggested as early as the 13th century but forgotten for some 200 years. The triangle itself was known and published before, by Stifel (Arithmetica Integra 1543) Tartaglia (Trattato 1556) Stevin (Arithmetic 1625) Pierre Herigone (Cours Mathematique 1634), and we also know it was known to the Chinese and the Arabs by the mid 13th century, but Pascal was the first to apply it to probability.

 

For pedagogical notes:
Use the notes tab at the top of this article or click here .

Notes
The word 'die' (plural 'dice') come from the Latin verb 'dare' (pron. da-ray) to give its participle dadus means 'given by the gods'.
The word Yantra is a Sanscrit word meaning a mystical diagram or picture. They contain geometric items and archetypal shapes and patterns of squares, triangles, circles and other floral patterns. In contrast, a Mantra is a spoken verse or poem.
At this time, 'Mathematics' included the applied mathematics of physics, statics, mechanics, hydraulics, and other practical arts. This is clear from John Dee's famous 'Preface' to the 1570 English Edition of Euclid.
It is possible that the scholar who wrote this poem might have been aware of the 'number triangle' of the Arabs.
References
General Background and History
David, F. N. Games, Gods and Gambling . New York. Dover Books
This is the well-known classic book on the subject still full of interesting and reliable information.


De Moivre, A. (1967) The Doctrine of Chances or A method of Calculating the Probabilities of Events in Play . London. Frank Cass.
A facsimilie of the 1738 second edition of Abraham de Moivre'??s classic where he makes corrections, expands the explanations, and gives more details of the solutions of the problems than in the first edition of 1718.


Ore, O. (1953) Cardano, The Gambling Scholar .
A good story and biography of Girolamo Cardano by the Danish Mathematician Oystein Ore. Contains a translation of Cardan'??s Liber de Ludo Aleae (Book on Games of Chance).


Hacking, I. (1975) The Emergence of Probability . C.U.P. Cambridge UK
Hacking's book contains many references to original works in the period up to and including the 18th century.


Hald, A. (2003) A History of Probability and Statistics and their Applications Before 1750 . New York. Wiley


Pennick, N. (1988) Games of the Gods . London. Hutchinson
Religious Beliefs, Superstition, Astrology and Divination in may cultures and their connections to many games of dice and on the board


Some Books for the Classroom
Jenkins, G.W. & Slack J.L. (1979) Classroom Experiments with Dice . St Albans. Tarquin Publications

Woods, G. Symmetry Dice . St Albans. Tarquin Publications

Benson, S. (2005) Ways to think about Mathematics:Activities and Investigations for Grade 6 . California. Corwin Press. This is a useful book with many examples of activities. There are sections about probability and binomial coefficients.

Weblinks
Here is a shop for all kinds of dice : large; small; all colours; with numbers; with spots; blank; arithmetic symbols; money symbols; polyhedral; round (yes round!); loaded; and for cheating! http://www.dice.co.uk/index.htm

This interesting Board Game site has many traditional games like Nine Men's Morris, various types of strategy games like Solitaire, Fox and Geese; Mancala, Ludo; and Snakes and Ladders. All of them have well-researched historical notes. http://www.tradgames.org.uk/features/board-games.htm


Albrecht Durer's famous engraving of a 4 x 4 Magic Square is explored on this website: http://mathforum.org/alejandre/magic.square/al.html

A COUPLE of weeks ago, I replaced my three-year-old BlackBerry Pearl with a much more powerful BlackBerry Bold. Needless to say, I was impressed with how far the technology had advanced in three years. Even when I didn’t have anybody to call or text or e-mail, I wanted to keep fondling my new Bold and experiencing the marvelous clarity of its screen, the silky action of its track pad, the shocking speed of its responses, the beguiling elegance of its graphics.

I was, in short, infatuated with my new device. I’d been similarly infatuated with my old device, of course; but over the years the bloom had faded from our relationship. I’d developed trust issues with my Pearl, accountability issues, compatibility issues and even, toward the end, some doubts about my Pearl’s very sanity, until I’d finally had to admit to myself that I’d outgrown the relationship.

Do I need to point out that — absent some wild, anthropomorphizing projection in which my old BlackBerry felt sad about the waning of my love for it — our relationship was entirely one-sided? Let me point it out anyway.

Let me further point out how ubiquitously the word “sexy” is used to describe late-model gadgets; and how the extremely cool things that we can do now with these gadgets — like impelling them to action with voice commands, or doing that spreading-the-fingers iPhone thing that makes images get bigger — would have looked, to people a hundred years ago, like a magician’s incantations, a magician’s hand gestures; and how, when we want to describe an erotic relationship that’s working perfectly, we speak, indeed, of magic.

Let me toss out the idea that, as our markets discover and respond to what consumers most want, our technology has become extremely adept at creating products that correspond to our fantasy ideal of an erotic relationship, in which the beloved object asks for nothing and gives everything, instantly, and makes us feel all powerful, and doesn’t throw terrible scenes when it’s replaced by an even sexier object and is consigned to a drawer.

To speak more generally, the ultimate goal of technology, the telos of techne, is to replace a natural world that’s indifferent to our wishes — a world of hurricanes and hardships and breakable hearts, a world of resistance — with a world so responsive to our wishes as to be, effectively, a mere extension of the self.

Let me suggest, finally, that the world of techno-consumerism is therefore troubled by real love, and that it has no choice but to trouble love in turn.

Its first line of defense is to commodify its enemy. You can all supply your own favorite, most nauseating examples of the commodification of love. Mine include the wedding industry, TV ads that feature cute young children or the giving of automobiles as Christmas presents, and the particularly grotesque equation of diamond jewelry with everlasting devotion. The message, in each case, is that if you love somebody you should buy stuff.

A related phenomenon is the transformation, courtesy of Facebook, of the verb “to like” from a state of mind to an action that you perform with your computer mouse, from a feeling to an assertion of consumer choice. And liking, in general, is commercial culture’s substitute for loving. The striking thing about all consumer products — and none more so than electronic devices and applications — is that they’re designed to be immensely likable. This is, in fact, the definition of a consumer product, in contrast to the product that is simply itself and whose makers aren’t fixated on your liking it. (I’m thinking here of jet engines, laboratory equipment, serious art and literature.)

But if you consider this in human terms, and you imagine a person defined by a desperation to be liked, what do you see? You see a person without integrity, without a center. In more pathological cases, you see a narcissist — a person who can’t tolerate the tarnishing of his or her self-image that not being liked represents, and who therefore either withdraws from human contact or goes to extreme, integrity-sacrificing lengths to be likable.

If you dedicate your existence to being likable, however, and if you adopt whatever cool persona is necessary to make it happen, it suggests that you’ve despaired of being loved for who you really are. And if you succeed in manipulating other people into liking you, it will be hard not to feel, at some level, contempt for those people, because they’ve fallen for your shtick. You may find yourself becoming depressed, or alcoholic, or, if you’re Donald Trump, running for president (and then quitting).

Consumer technology products would never do anything this unattractive, because they aren’t people. They are, however, great allies and enablers of narcissism. Alongside their built-in eagerness to be liked is a built-in eagerness to reflect well on us. Our lives look a lot more interesting when they’re filtered through the sexy Facebook interface. We star in our own movies, we photograph ourselves incessantly, we click the mouse and a machine confirms our sense of mastery.

And, since our technology is really just an extension of ourselves, we don’t have to have contempt for its manipulability in the way we might with actual people. It’s all one big endless loop. We like the mirror and the mirror likes us. To friend a person is merely to include the person in our private hall of flattering mirrors.

Opinion Today
NEWSLETTER

Opinion Today

Get expert analysis of the news and a guide to the big ideas shaping the world.


Sign up for free

Sent daily. Unsubscribe any time.

I may be overstating the case, a little bit. Very probably, you’re sick to death of hearing social media disrespected by cranky 51-year-olds. My aim here is mainly to set up a contrast between the narcissistic tendencies of technology and the problem of actual love. My friend Alice Sebold likes to talk about “getting down in the pit and loving somebody.” She has in mind the dirt that love inevitably splatters on the mirror of our self-regard.

Image
Credit...Illustration by Sarah Illenberger, Photograph by Ragnar Schmuck
The simple fact of the matter is that trying to be perfectly likable is incompatible with loving relationships. Sooner or later, for example, you’re going to find yourself in a hideous, screaming fight, and you’ll hear coming out of your mouth things that you yourself don’t like at all, things that shatter your self-image as a fair, kind, cool, attractive, in-control, funny, likable person. Something realer than likability has come out in you, and suddenly you’re having an actual life.

Suddenly there’s a real choice to be made, not a fake consumer choice between a BlackBerry and an iPhone, but a question: Do I love this person? And, for the other person, does this person love me?

There is no such thing as a person whose real self you like every particle of. This is why a world of liking is ultimately a lie. But there is such a thing as a person whose real self you love every particle of. And this is why love is such an existential threat to the techno-consumerist order: it exposes the lie.

This is not to say that love is only about fighting. Love is about bottomless empathy, born out of the heart’s revelation that another person is every bit as real as you are. And this is why love, as I understand it, is always specific. Trying to love all of humanity may be a worthy endeavor, but, in a funny way, it keeps the focus on the self, on the self’s own moral or spiritual well-being. Whereas, to love a specific person, and to identify with his or her struggles and joys as if they were your own, you have to surrender some of your self.

The big risk here, of course, is rejection. We can all handle being disliked now and then, because there’s such an infinitely big pool of potential likers. But to expose your whole self, not just the likable surface, and to have it rejected, can be catastrophically painful. The prospect of pain generally, the pain of loss, of breakup, of death, is what makes it so tempting to avoid love and stay safely in the world of liking.

And yet pain hurts but it doesn’t kill. When you consider the alternative — an anesthetized dream of self-sufficiency, abetted by technology — pain emerges as the natural product and natural indicator of being alive in a resistant world. To go through a life painlessly is to have not lived. Even just to say to yourself, “Oh, I’ll get to that love and pain stuff later, maybe in my 30s” is to consign yourself to 10 years of merely taking up space on the planet and burning up its resources. Of being (and I mean this in the most damning sense of the word) a consumer.

When I was in college, and for many years after, I liked the natural world. Didn’t love it, but definitely liked it. It can be very pretty, nature. And since I was looking for things to find wrong with the world, I naturally gravitated to environmentalism, because there were certainly plenty of things wrong with the environment. And the more I looked at what was wrong — an exploding world population, exploding levels of resource consumption, rising global temperatures, the trashing of the oceans, the logging of our last old-growth forests — the angrier I became.

Finally, in the mid-1990s, I made a conscious decision to stop worrying about the environment. There was nothing meaningful that I personally could do to save the planet, and I wanted to get on with devoting myself to the things I loved. I still tried to keep my carbon footprint small, but that was as far as I could go without falling back into rage and despair.

BUT then a funny thing happened to me. It’s a long story, but basically I fell in love with birds. I did this not without significant resistance, because it’s very uncool to be a birdwatcher, because anything that betrays real passion is by definition uncool. But little by little, in spite of myself, I developed this passion, and although one-half of a passion is obsession, the other half is love.

And so, yes, I kept a meticulous list of the birds I’d seen, and, yes, I went to inordinate lengths to see new species. But, no less important, whenever I looked at a bird, any bird, even a pigeon or a robin, I could feel my heart overflow with love. And love, as I’ve been trying to say today, is where our troubles begin.

Because now, not merely liking nature but loving a specific and vital part of it, I had no choice but to start worrying about the environment again. The news on that front was no better than when I’d decided to quit worrying about it — was considerably worse, in fact — but now those threatened forests and wetlands and oceans weren’t just pretty scenes for me to enjoy. They were the home of animals I loved.

And here’s where a curious paradox emerged. My anger and pain and despair about the planet were only increased by my concern for wild birds, and yet, as I began to get involved in bird conservation and learned more about the many threats that birds face, it became easier, not harder, to live with my anger and despair and pain.

How does this happen? I think, for one thing, that my love of birds became a portal to an important, less self-centered part of myself that I’d never even known existed. Instead of continuing to drift forward through my life as a global citizen, liking and disliking and withholding my commitment for some later date, I was forced to confront a self that I had to either straight-up accept or flat-out reject.

Which is what love will do to a person. Because the fundamental fact about all of us is that we’re alive for a while but will die before long. This fact is the real root cause of all our anger and pain and despair. And you can either run from this fact or, by way of love, you can embrace it.

When you stay in your room and rage or sneer or shrug your shoulders, as I did for many years, the world and its problems are impossibly daunting. But when you go out and put yourself in real relation to real people, or even just real animals, there’s a very real danger that you might love some of them.

Dark romance is a genre that seduces readers with intensity, danger, and twisted desire. It’s not for the faint of heart—but for authors willing to explore morally gray characters, high-stakes emotional conflict, and taboo themes, dark romance offers a powerful, provocative storytelling space.

If you're looking to challenge your craft or break into a bold new niche, this article will help you understand what dark romance is, how it differs from other subgenres, and whether it might be the right fit for your writing style and creative goals.\

What Is Dark Romance?
At its core, dark romance is a subgenre of romance that delves into themes of power imbalance, obsession, danger, and redemption. These stories often feature emotionally intense relationships that push the boundaries of what’s acceptable, exploring passion alongside pain, desire intertwined with fear.

Unlike contemporary or sweet romance, dark romance doesn't guarantee morally upright heroes or fully safe emotional spaces. Instead, it embraces the uncomfortable: characters may act out of trauma, revenge, or twisted love. Redemption arcs are common, but not always guaranteed.

Common Elements of the Dark Romance Genre:
Morally gray or deeply flawed love interests
Power dynamics (e.g., captor/captive, enemies-to-lovers)
Taboo relationships (age gaps, forbidden love, criminal underworlds)
Psychological tension, suspense, and emotional trauma
Themes of dominance, submission, revenge, or obsession
Dark romance thrives on emotional intensity. The goal is not just to arouse or entertain, but to unsettle, provoke, and stir deep feelings in readers.

How Dark Romance Differs from Other Romance Subgenres
One of the biggest differences between dark romance and other romance subgenres is the moral ambiguity. In sweet or contemporary romance, characters are typically relatable and “good.” In dark romance, the lines blur. The hero might be an antihero—or even a villain. The heroine may make ethically questionable choices. Consent may be dubious. And the road to love is often littered with manipulation, betrayal, or danger.

Another key difference is reader expectation. Dark romance readers want to be emotionally wrecked—in a good way. They crave the intensity of high-stakes relationships that border on the dangerous. For authors, this means you must write with sensitivity, nuance, and awareness, especially around triggering content.

Why Readers Love Dark Romance
Despite (or because of) its heavy themes, dark romance has a passionate, loyal readership. These readers love:

High emotional stakes and tortured love stories
Characters who are damaged but redeemable
Intense, gritty conflict between lovers
Fantasy scenarios that feel raw and forbidden
The catharsis of emotional healing or moral justice
If you understand your audience and write with clarity and care, writing dark romance can be deeply rewarding. The genre allows you to explore human darkness—while still offering the hope of love.

Should You Write Dark Romance?
Now that you know what dark romance is, the next question is: Should you write it? Here are a few things to consider.

✅ You might thrive in the dark romance genre if:
You enjoy exploring emotional and psychological depth
You're interested in morally gray characters and flawed protagonists
You don’t shy away from taboo or controversial topics
You're willing to provide content warnings and engage with difficult themes respectfully
You want to challenge yourself with complex relationships and layered character arcs
⚠️ You may want to hold off if:
You’re uncomfortable with writing non-traditional or morally ambiguous relationships
You’re unsure how to handle triggering material responsibly
You're not yet confident in managing tone, pacing, or reader trust
You dislike writing about trauma, dominance, or control dynamics
Writing dark romance requires emotional intelligence, storytelling precision, and a strong grasp of character psychology. It’s not about glorifying harm—it’s about exploring how love can emerge from darkness, how broken people find connection, and how healing can coexist with hurt.

Tips for Writing Dark Romance That Resonates
If you’re ready to dive in, here are some tips to make your dark romance story compelling and respectful:

Understand the difference between dark and toxic – Darkness can be complex and redemptive. Toxicity without growth or consequence can alienate readers.
Develop deep character motivations – Readers will accept wild behavior if it’s grounded in believable emotion and backstory.
Provide content warnings – Transparency helps readers decide whether your book is right for them.
Balance consent carefully – Even if you explore dubious or non-consensual dynamics, be thoughtful about how they’re portrayed.
Pace the emotional journey – Don’t rush from trauma to love. Earn redemption with gradual change and consequence.
Read within the genre – Study successful dark romance authors to understand what works, what readers expect, and how tone is maintained.
Final Thoughts: Embracing the Shadows
Dark romance isn’t about shock value—it’s about emotional truth. These stories allow writers to explore extremes: of love, obsession, fear, and healing. For intermediate authors looking to stretch their storytelling muscles, this genre offers creative freedom and emotional power—if you're willing to go deep.

If you crave complexity, aren't afraid of emotional mess, and want to write stories that linger in readers' minds long after the final page, then dark romance might just be your next great love.

 

🔥 Dark Romance Story Prompts
The Captive’s Choice
A ruthless crime lord takes a hostage—but she refuses to be broken. As power shifts between them, obsession blooms. Who's really in control?
Lover or Liar?
She’s investigating the mysterious billionaire who ruined her sister’s life. But when he pulls her into his world, the lines between vengeance and desire blur.
Second Chances in Shadows
He walked away after destroying her family’s reputation. Years later, he’s back—wealthier, darker, and determined to make her his.
The Arrangement
A struggling artist agrees to a year-long “relationship” with a powerful man who has everything—except love. But his rules are more twisted than she imagined.
Deadly Devotion
She’s the daughter of a detective. He’s the son of the mafia boss her father just locked away. They shouldn’t fall in love—but they’re already too deep.
The Masked Lover
Every Friday night, she meets a masked man who knows her secrets—and her darkest desires. But the truth behind the mask could destroy her.
Cold Vows
Forced into marriage with her enemy to stop a war between empires, she plots to kill him. But he may not be the monster she was raised to hate.
Touched by Ruin
He saved her from an abusive past—but his methods are cruel, and his love is possessive. Can she find freedom in the arms of someone who wants to own her?

Programming languages are the foundation of software development, allowing developers to create applications, websites, and systems through computer-understandable instructions.

They use a formal syntax and rules to write code that is translated into machine language for execution by the computer.
Programming languages bridge human logic and machine execution, providing a structured way to solve problems.
Different languages serve different purposes — for example, Python is beginner-friendly and versatile, while C++ is used for high-performance tasks like game development.
Types of Programming Languages
Programming languages are classified based on their level of abstraction:

High-Level Languages: Human-readable and are portable across computers. Examples: Python, Java, JavaScript. They need a compiler or interpreter to run.
Low-Level Languages: Close to machine code, giving more control over hardware but harder to write. Examples: Machine code.
Assembly Languages: A mix between high- and low-level, using simple symbolic instructions for a computer. An assembler converts it into machine code.
Key Terms in Programming Languages
Syntax: Rules for writing code, like grammar in human languages (e.g., C uses {}, Python uses indentation).
Data Types: Types of data a program can handle, like integers, floats, strings, and booleans.
Variables: Named storage for data that can change during program execution (e.g., score = 100).
Operators: Symbols like +, -, *, /, and == for arithmetic or comparisons.
Control Statements: Manage program flow using if-else, loops, and function calls.
Libraries & Frameworks: Pre-written code to simplify tasks (e.g., Python’s pandas, JavaScript’s React).
Paradigms: Programming styles, like Procedural (C), Object-Oriented (Java), and Functional (Haskell).
Popular Programming Languages
Here are some widely used programming languages and their typical applications:

Python: Known for simplicity and readability, used in data science, machine learning, and web development.
Java: Platform-independent, popular for enterprise applications and Android development.
JavaScript: Essential for web development, enabling interactive websites.
C++: High-performance language for system programming, games, and real-time applications.
C#: Used for Windows applications and game development with Unity.
Swift: Apple’s language for iOS and macOS apps.
Go: Designed for scalability and cloud computing.
Ruby: Known for web frameworks like Ruby on Rails.
Each language has unique strengths, making it suitable for specific domains

Basic Example Of Most Popular Programming Languages:
Here the basic code for addition of two numbers are given in some popular languages (like C, C++,Java, Python, C#, JavaScript etc.).




// C++ program for sum of 2 numbers
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;
​
int main()
{
    int a, b, sum;
    a = 10;
    b = 15;
    sum = a + b;
    cout << "Sum of " << a << " and " << b
         << " is: " << sum; // perform addition operation
    return 0;
}

Output
Sum of 10 and 15 is: 25
Tips for learning new programming language
By following these steps, you’ll learn faster and build a solid foundation in any new programming language.

Start with Fundamentals: Learn syntax, variables, data types, and control structures.
Practice Regularly: Write code daily to build consistency and skill.
Work on Projects: Apply concepts through small personal projects.
Read Documentation: Understand language features and best practices.
Engage with Communities: Ask questions and learn from others.
Learn from Experts: Study code from experienced developers.
Practice Debugging: Strengthen problem-solving by fixing errors in your code.

Here are concise one-liners for 50 commonly used programming languages:

1. Python – High-level, versatile language known for readability and vast libraries.
2. JavaScript – Core web language enabling dynamic client-side interactivity.
3. Java – Object-oriented, cross-platform language powering enterprise and Android apps.
4. C – Foundational procedural language offering low-level system control.
5. C++ – Extension of C adding object-orientation and high-performance abstractions.
6. C# – Microsoft’s modern, type-safe language for .NET applications and games.
7. Go (Golang) – Google’s statically typed language built for concurrency and simplicity.
8. Rust – Memory-safe systems language combining speed with safety guarantees.
9. PHP – Server-side scripting language powering much of the web (e.g., WordPress).
10. Swift – Apple’s modern language for iOS, macOS, and watchOS development.
11. Kotlin – JVM-based, concise alternative to Java favored for Android apps.
12. TypeScript – Typed superset of JavaScript for safer, large-scale web code.
13. Ruby – Elegant, expressive language best known for the Rails framework.
14. SQL – Declarative language for managing and querying relational databases.
15. R – Statistical computing and data visualization language.
16. MATLAB – Numeric computing environment for engineering and scientific tasks.
17. Perl – Flexible scripting language known for text processing power.
18. Scala – JVM language blending functional and object-oriented paradigms.
19. Haskell – Pure functional language emphasizing immutability and type safety.
20. Lua – Lightweight scripting language embedded in games and applications.
21. Shell (Bash) – Command-line scripting language for Unix system automation.
22. PowerShell – Microsoft’s task automation and configuration scripting tool.
23. Dart – Google’s language behind Flutter for fast cross-platform UIs.
24. Objective-C – Pre-Swift Apple language combining C with Smalltalk syntax.
25. Elixir – Scalable functional language built on the Erlang VM.
26. Erlang – Concurrency-oriented language for telecom and distributed systems.
27. Julia – High-performance dynamic language for numerical computing.
28. Fortran – Oldest major language, dominant in scientific computation.
29. COBOL – Legacy business language still used in banking and finance.
30. Assembly – Low-level code mapping directly to machine instructions.
31. Groovy – Dynamic JVM language often used in Gradle and automation.
32. VBA – Macro language embedded in Microsoft Office products.
33. Solidity – Smart-contract language for the Ethereum blockchain.
34. VHDL – Hardware description language for digital circuit design.
35. Verilog – Hardware design language for modeling electronic systems.
36. Prolog – Logic programming language for AI and symbolic reasoning.
37. Lisp – Pioneering functional language with unique parentheses syntax.
38. Scheme – Minimalist Lisp dialect emphasizing clean semantics.
39. F# – Functional-first .NET language integrating OO features.
40. Ada – Strongly typed language used in aerospace and defense systems.
41. Pascal – Teaching-oriented structured programming language.
42. Scratch – Visual block-based language for learning programming concepts.
43. Racket – Modern Lisp family language used for education and research.
44. Crystal – Ruby-like syntax with compiled performance via LLVM.
45. Nim – Statically typed language combining C-level speed and Python clarity.
46. Zig – Low-level systems language designed as a C alternative.
47. OCaml – Functional language with powerful type inference.
48. Smalltalk – Pure OO language that pioneered graphical IDEs.
49. SQLPL (PL/SQL, T-SQL) – Procedural extensions for SQL database logic.
50. ABAP – SAP’s proprietary language for enterprise business applications.

The Premier League is a professional association football league in England and the highest level of the English football league system. Contested by 20 clubs, it operates on a system of promotion and relegation with the English Football League (EFL). Seasons usually run from August to May, with each team playing 38 matches: two against each other team, one home and one away.[1] Most games are played on weekend afternoons, with occasional weekday evening fixtures.[2]

The competition was founded as the FA Premier League on 20 February 1992, following the decision of clubs from the First Division (the top tier since 1888) to break away from the English Football League. Teams are still promoted and relegated to and from the EFL Championship each season. The Premier League is a corporation managed by a chief executive, with member clubs as shareholders.[3] The Premier League takes advantage of a £5 billion domestic television rights deal, with Sky and BT Group broadcasting 128 and 32 games, respectively.[4][5] This will rise to £6.7 billion from 2025 to 2029.[6] In the 2022–2025 cycle, the Premier League earned a record £5.6 billion from international rights.[7] As of 2023–24, Premier League clubs received central payments totalling £2.8 billion, with additional solidarity payments made to relegated EFL clubs.[8]

The Premier League is the most-watched sports league in the world, broadcast in 212 territories to 643 million homes, with a potential TV audience of 4.7 billion people.[9][10] As of the 2024–25 season, the Premier League has the highest average and aggregate match attendance of any association football league in the world, at 40,421 per game.[11][12] Most stadiums operate close to full capacity.[13] The Premier League is currently ranked first in the UEFA coefficient rankings based on performances in European competitions over the past five seasons, ahead of Italy's Serie A.[14] The English top-flight has produced the second-highest number of European Cup / UEFA Champions League titles, with a record six English clubs having won fifteen European cups in total.[15]

Fifty-one clubs have competed in the Premier League since its inception in 1992: 49 from England and two from Wales. Seven have won the title: Manchester United (13), Manchester City (8), Chelsea (5), Arsenal (3), Liverpool (2), Blackburn Rovers (1) and Leicester City (1).[16] Only six clubs have played in every season to date: Arsenal, Chelsea, Everton, Liverpool, Manchester United, and Tottenham Hotspur.[17]

History
See also: List of Premier League seasons
Origins

Alternative logo since 2016
Despite major European success in the 1970s and early 1980s, the mid-to-late 1980s marked a low point for English football. Stadiums were ageing with poor facilities, hooliganism was rife, and all English clubs faced a 5-year ban from European competition following the events of the 1985 Heysel Stadium disaster with Liverpool facing an extra year.[18] The Football League First Division, the top level of English football since 1888, was behind leagues such as Italy's Serie A and Spain's La Liga in attendance and revenues, and several top English players had moved abroad.[19]

By the turn of the 1990s, the downward trend was starting to reverse. At the 1990 FIFA World Cup, England reached the semi-finals; UEFA, European football's governing body, lifted the five-year ban on English clubs playing in European competitions in 1990, resulting in Manchester United lifting the Cup Winners' Cup in 1991. The Taylor Report on stadium safety standards, which proposed expensive upgrades to create all-seater stadiums in the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster (between the fans of Liverpool and the fans of Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, Yorkshire on 15 April 1989) was published in January 1990.[20]

During the 1980s, major English clubs began transforming into business ventures, applying commercial principles to club administration to maximise revenue. Martin Edwards of Manchester United, Irving Scholar of Tottenham Hotspur, and David Dein of Arsenal were among the key figures in this shift.[21] The drive for greater revenue and influence led First Division clubs to threaten a breakaway from the Football League. They also began demanding higher fees from broadcasters.[22] As a result, they secured increased voting power and a 50% share of all television and sponsorship income in 1986.[21] Before 1986, clubs received only around £25,000 per year from television rights, and this rose to £600,000 by 1988.[23] The Football League had secured £6.3 million for a two-year deal in 1986, followed by a £44 million deal over four years in 1988 with ITV, with top clubs taking 75% of the income.[24][25]

Negotiations took place in 1988 under the threat of ten clubs forming a "super league". They were persuaded to stay, but with leading clubs securing the bulk of the deal.[24][26][27] The talks also revealed that the bigger clubs would need the entire First Division to gain enough support for a future breakaway.[28] By the early 1990s, such a move was again being considered, especially as clubs faced the financial burden of stadium upgrades recommended by the Taylor Report.[29]

In 1990, the managing director of London Weekend Television (LWT), Greg Dyke, met with the representatives of the "Big Five" football clubs in England (Manchester United, Liverpool, Tottenham Hotspur, Everton, and Arsenal) over a dinner.[30] The meeting was to pave the way for a breakaway from the Football League.[31] Dyke believed that it would be more lucrative for LWT if only the larger clubs in the country were featured on national television and wanted to establish whether the clubs would be interested in a larger share of television rights money.[32] The five clubs agreed with the suggestion and decided to press ahead with it; however, the league would have no credibility without the backing of the Football Association, and so David Dein of Arsenal held talks to see whether the FA were receptive to the idea. The FA did not have an amicable relationship with the Football League at the time and considered it a way to weaken the Football League's position.[33] The FA released a report in June 1991, Blueprint for the Future of Football, that supported the plan for the Premier League, with the FA as the ultimate authority that would oversee the breakaway league.[28]

Founding and Manchester United dominance (1990s)
See also: Foundation of the Premier League
Foundation, 1990s and early Manchester United dominance
Season	Champions	Runners-up
1992–93	Manchester United	Aston Villa
1993–94	Manchester United	Blackburn Rovers
1994–95	Blackburn Rovers	Manchester United
1995–96	Manchester United	Newcastle United
1996–97	Manchester United	Newcastle United
1997–98	Arsenal	Manchester United
1998–99	Manchester United	Arsenal
  Double winners
  Treble winners
At the close of the 1990–91 season, a proposal was tabled for the establishment of a new league that would bring more money into the game overall. The Founder Members Agreement, signed on 17 July 1991, by the game's top-flight clubs, established the basic principles for setting up the FA Premier League.[34]

The newly formed top division was to have commercial independence from the Football Association and the Football League, giving the FA Premier League licence to negotiate its own broadcast and sponsorship agreements. The argument given was that the extra income would allow English clubs to compete with teams across Europe.[19] This restructuring marked the end of the 104-year-old Football League system that had operated until then with four divisions; the Premier League would run as a single division, with the Football League continuing with three.[27]

Although Dyke played a significant role in the creation of the Premier League, he and ITV (of which LWT was part) lost out in the bidding for broadcast rights: BSkyB won with a bid of £304 million over five years, with the BBC awarded the highlights package broadcast on Match of the Day.[30][32]

Luton Town, Notts County, and West Ham United were the three teams relegated from the old First Division at the end of the 1991–92 season, and did not take part in the inaugural Premier League season. They were replaced by Ipswich Town, Middlesbrough, and Blackburn Rovers, promoted from the old Second Division.[35] On 27 May 1992, the 22 First Division clubs resigned en masse from the Football League, and the FA Premier League was formed as a limited company, working out of an office at the Football Association's then headquarters in Lancaster Gate.[19]

The league held its first season in 1992–93. The 22 inaugural members of the new Premier League were:[36]

Arsenal
Aston Villa
Blackburn Rovers
Chelsea
Coventry City
Crystal Palace
Everton
Ipswich Town
Leeds United
Liverpool
Manchester City
Manchester United
Middlesbrough
Norwich City
Nottingham Forest
Oldham Athletic
Queens Park Rangers
Sheffield United
Sheffield Wednesday
Southampton
Tottenham Hotspur
Wimbledon
The first Premier League goal was scored by Brian Deane of Sheffield United in a 2–1 win against Manchester United.[37]

Manchester United won the inaugural edition of the new league, ending a twenty-six year wait to be crowned champions of England. Bolstered by this breakthrough, United quickly became the dominant force in the Premier League, winning seven of the first nine titles and securing two League and FA Cup doubles. They were initially led by experienced players such as Bryan Robson, Steve Bruce, Paul Ince, Mark Hughes and Eric Cantona, before evolving into a younger, more dynamic side featuring Roy Keane and the Class of 92, a group of homegrown talents including David Beckham and Paul Scholes.

At the end of the 1994–95 season, four rather than three clubs were relegated, while only two were promoted from the Football League First Division. This allowed the Premier League to reduce its size from 22 to 20 clubs for the start of the 1995–96 season, reducing the number of matches per team from 42 to 38.

Between 1993 and 1997, Blackburn Rovers and Newcastle United came closest to challenging United's early dominance. Blackburn, led by the prolific Alan Shearer, won the 1994–95 FA Premier League. Newcastle topped the table for much of the 1995–96 season, and signed Shearer in the summer of 1996 for a then world-record fee of £15 million. He would go on to become the all-time top scorer, a record he still holds. Arsenal emerged as serious contenders by winning the League and FA Cup double in 1997–98, and from that point they and Manchester United would go on to dominate the league for the next several years.

In the 1998–99 season, Manchester United completed a historic treble by winning the Premier League, FA Cup and UEFA Champions League. In so doing, they became the first English club to win the European Cup since Liverpool in the 1983–84 season, securing the trophy with a dramatic comeback victory over Bayern Munich in the final.

Promotion and relegation
A system of promotion and relegation exists between the Premier League and the EFL Championship. The three lowest placed teams in the Premier League are relegated to the Championship, and the top two teams from the Championship promoted to the Premier League,[82] with an additional team promoted after a series of play-offs involving the third, fourth, fifth and sixth placed clubs.[83] The number of clubs was reduced from 22 to 20 in 1995, when four teams were relegated from the league and only two teams promoted.[84][85] The top flight had only been expanded to 22 teams at the start of the 1991–92 season – the year prior to the formation of the Premier League.[85]

On 8 June 2006, FIFA requested that all major European leagues, including Italy's Serie A and Spain's La Liga, be reduced to 18 teams by the start of the 2007–08 season. The Premier League responded by announcing their intention to resist such a reduction.[86] Ultimately, the 2007–08 season kicked off again with 20 teams.[87]

Video Assistant Referee
Video assistant referee (VAR), was introduced to the Premier League at the beginning of the 2019–20 season. It uses technology and officials to assist the referee in making decisions on the pitch.[88] However, its use has been met with mixed receptions from fans and pundits, with some praising its accuracy whilst others criticise its impact on the flow of the game and consistency of decision-making.

The on-field referee still makes the final decision, but VAR can assist the referee in the decision-making process. VAR can only be used for four types of decisions: goals, penalty decisions, direct red card incidents, and cases of mistaken identity. VAR officials review the video footage and communicate with the on-field referee via a headset. The VAR officials are located in a central control room, which is equipped with multiple camera angles and the ability to replay footage at various speeds.

A study evaluating fan reception of VAR in the Premier League was made by Otto Kolbinger and Melanie Knopp and was done by analysing Twitter data.[89] The researchers used sentiment analysis to measure the overall positive or negative attitudes towards VAR, as well as topic modelling to identify specific issues that fans are discussing related to VAR. The study found that the reception of VAR on Twitter is largely negative, with fans expressing frustration and criticism of the technology's impact on the flow of the game and the inconsistency of decisions. The researchers also identified specific issues, such as handball and offside decisions, that fans are particularly critical of. The study concludes that VAR has not been well received by fans in the Premier League, and that efforts to improve the technology and increase transparency in decision-making are needed to address these concerns.

Clubs
Main article: List of Premier League clubs
See also: Performance record of clubs in the Premier League and All-time Premier League table
Fifty-one clubs have played in the Premier League from its inception in 1992, up to and including the 2025–26 season.[90]

Champions
See also: List of English football champions
Club	Winners	Runners-up	Winning seasons
Manchester United	13	7	1992–93, 1993–94, 1995–96, 1996–97, 1998–99, 1999–2000, 2000–01, 2002–03, 2006–07, 2007–08, 2008–09, 2010–11, 2012–13
Manchester City	8	3	2011–12, 2013–14, 2017–18, 2018–19, 2020–21, 2021–22, 2022–23, 2023–24
Chelsea	5	4	2004–05, 2005–06, 2009–10, 2014–15, 2016–17
Arsenal	3	9	1997–98, 2001–02, 2003–04
Liverpool	2	5	2019–20, 2024–25
Blackburn Rovers	1	1	1994–95
Leicester City	1	0	2015–16
Italics indicate former Premier League champions that are currently outside the Premier League.

2025–26 season
Twenty clubs are competing in the 2025–26 season – top seventeen from the previous season and three promoted from the Championship.

2025–26
Club	2024–25
Position	First season in
top division	First season in
Premier League	Seasons
in top
division	Seasons
in Premier
League	First season of
current spell in
top division	No. of seasons
of current spell
in Premier League	Top
division
titles	Most
recent top
division title
Arsenal[v 1][v 2]	2nd	1904–05	1992–93	109	34	1919–20 (100 seasons[v 3])	34	13	2003–04
Aston Villa[v 1][v 4]	6th	1888–89	1992–93	112	31	2019–20 (7 seasons)	7	7	1980–81
Bournemouth	9th	2015–16	2015–16	9	9	2022–23 (4 seasons)	4	0	–
Brentford[v 2]	10th	1935–36	2021–22	10	5	2021–22 (5 seasons)	5	0	–
Brighton & Hove Albion[v 2]	8th	1979–80	2017–18	13	9	2017–18 (9 seasons)	9	0	–
Burnley[v 4]	2nd (EFL)	1888-89	2009-10	62	10	2025-26 (1 season)	1	2	1959-60
Chelsea[v 1][v 2]	4th	1907–08	1992–93	91	34	1989–90 (37 seasons)	34	6	2016–17
Crystal Palace[v 1]	12th	1969–70	1992–93	26	17	2013–14 (13 seasons)	13	0	–
Everton[v 1][v 2][v 4]	13th	1888–89	1992–93	123	34	1954–55 (72 seasons)	34	9	1986–87
Fulham	11th	1949–50	2001–02	31	19	2022–23 (4 seasons)	4	0	–
Leeds United[v 1]	1st (EFL)	1924-25	1992–93	54	16	2025–26 (1 season)	1	3	1991–92
Liverpool[v 1][v 2]	1st	1894–95	1992–93	111	34	1962–63 (64 seasons)	34	20	2024–25
Manchester City[v 1]	3rd	1899–1900	1992–93	97	29	2002–03 (24 seasons)	24	10	2023–24
Manchester United[v 1][v 2]	15th	1892–93	1992–93	101	34	1975–76 (51 seasons)	34	20	2012–13
Newcastle United	5th	1898–99	1993–94	94	31	2017–18 (9 seasons)	9	4	1926–27
Nottingham Forest[v 1]	7th	1892–93	1992–93	60	9	2022–23 (4 seasons)	4	1	1977–78
Sunderland	4th playoffs (EFL)	1890–91	1996–97	87	26	2025–26 (1 season)	1	6	1935-36
Tottenham Hotspur[v 1][v 2]	17th	1909–10	1992–93	91	34	1978–79 (48 seasons)	34	2	1960–61
West Ham United	14th	1923–24	1993–94	68	30	2012–13 (14 seasons)	14	0	–
Wolverhampton Wanderers[v 4]	16th	1888–89	2003–04	71	12	2018–19 (8 seasons)	8	3	1958–59
Leicester City, Ipswich Town and Southampton were relegated to the EFL Championship for the 2025–26 season, whilst Leeds United, Burnley, and Sunderland, as winners, runners-up and play-off final winners, respectively, were promoted from the 2024–25 season.
Only two clubs have remained in the Premier League since their first promotion: Brentford and Brighton & Hove Albion, who have been in 5 and 9 season(s) (out of 34), respectively.
 Founding member of the Premier League
 Never been relegated from the Premier League
 Reduced from 106 seasons due to WW2.
 One of the original twelve Football League teams
This section is transcluded from Template:Premier League labelled map. (edit | history)
Premier League is located in EnglandLondonLondonAston VillaAston VillaBournemouthBournemouthBrightonBrightonBurnleyBurnleyLeeds UnitedLeeds UnitedEvertonEvertonLiverpoolLiverpoolMan CityMan CityMan UnitedMan UnitedNewcastleNewcastleNottingham ForestNottingham ForestSunderlandSunderlandWolverhamptonWolverhamptonLondon teams: Arsenal Brentford Chelsea Crystal Palace Fulham Tottenham Hotspur West Ham UnitedLondon teams:
Arsenal
Brentford
Chelsea
Crystal Palace
Fulham
Tottenham Hotspur
West Ham United
Locations of the 2025–26 Premier League clubs
Greater London Premier League football clubsArsenalArsenalBrentfordBrentfordChelseaChelseaCrystal PalaceCrystal PalaceFulhamFulhamTottenham HotspurTottenham HotspurWest Ham UnitedWest Ham United
Location of clubs around Greater London for the 2025–26 Premier League



Non-English clubs
See also: List of association football clubs playing in the league of another country
In 2011, after Swansea City gained promotion, a Welsh club participated in the Premier League for the first time.[91][92] The first Premier League match to be played outside England was Swansea City's home match at Liberty Stadium against Wigan Athletic on 20 August 2011.[93] The number of Welsh clubs in the Premier League increased to two in 2013–14, as Cardiff City gained promotion,[94] but they were relegated after their maiden season.[95] Cardiff were promoted again in 2017–18 but the number of Welsh clubs remained the same for the 2018–19 Premier League season, as Swansea City had been relegated from the Premier League in 2017–18.[96] Following Cardiff City's relegation after the 2018–19 season, there are currently no Welsh clubs participating in the Premier League.[97]

Because they are members of the Football Association of Wales (FAW), the question of whether clubs like Swansea should represent England or Wales in European competitions has caused long-running discussions in UEFA. Swansea took one of England's three available places in the Europa League in 2013–14 by winning the League Cup in 2012–13.[98] The right of Welsh clubs to take up such English places was in doubt until UEFA clarified the matter in March 2012, allowing them to participate.[99]

Participation in the Premier League by some Scottish or Irish clubs has sometimes been discussed, but without result. The idea came closest to reality in 1998, when Wimbledon received Premier League approval to relocate to Dublin, Ireland, but the move was blocked by the Football Association of Ireland.[100][101][102][103] Additionally, the English media occasionally discusses the idea that Scotland's two biggest teams, Celtic and Rangers, should or will take part in the Premier League, but nothing has come of these discussions.[104]

Seasons in English top flight
There are 65 teams that have taken part in 127 English top flight championships (both the Football League First Division and the Premier League) that were played from the 1888–89 season until the 2025–26 season. The teams in bold compete in the Premier League currently, while the teams in italics have never competed in the Premier League. The year in parentheses represents the most recent year of participation at this level. No team has played top flight football in every season; the closest being Everton, who have played in 123 of the 127 seasons.

123 seasons: Everton (2026)
112 seasons: Aston Villa (2026)
111 seasons: Liverpool (2026)
109 seasons: Arsenal (2026)
101 seasons: Manchester United (2026)
97 seasons: Manchester City (2026)
94 seasons: Newcastle United (2026)
91 seasons: Chelsea (2026), Tottenham Hotspur (2026)
87 seasons: Sunderland (2026)
81 seasons: West Bromwich Albion (2021)
73 seasons: Bolton Wanderers (2012)
72 seasons: Blackburn Rovers (2012)
71 seasons: Wolverhampton Wanderers (2026)
68 seasons: West Ham United (2026)
66 seasons: Sheffield Wednesday (2000)
65 seasons: Derby County (2008)
63 seasons: Sheffield United (2024)
62 seasons: Stoke City (2018)
61 seasons: Middlesbrough (2017), Burnley (2026)
60 seasons: Nottingham Forest (2026)
57 seasons: Birmingham City (2011)
56 seasons: Leicester City (2025)
54 seasons: Leeds United (2026)
47 seasons: Southampton (2025)
46 seasons: Preston North End (1961)
34 seasons: Coventry City (2001)
33 seasons: Portsmouth (2010)
32 seasons: Huddersfield Town (2019)
31 seasons: Fulham (2026)
30 seasons: Notts County (1992)
28 seasons: Blackpool (2011)
27 seasons: Norwich City (2022), Ipswich Town (2025)
26 seasons: Charlton Athletic (2007), Crystal Palace (2026)
23 seasons: Queens Park Rangers (2015)
22 seasons: Bury (1929)
17 seasons: Cardiff City (2019), Luton Town (2024)
14 seasons: Wimbledon (2000), Watford (2022)
13 seasons: Brighton & Hove Albion (2026)
12 seasons: Grimsby Town (1948), Oldham Athletic (1994), Bradford City (2001)
10 seasons: Brentford (2026)
9 seasons: Bristol City (1980), Swansea City (2018), Bournemouth (2026)
8 seasons: Wigan Athletic (2013)
5 seasons: Accrington (1893), Hull City (2017)
3 seasons: Bradford (Park Avenue) (1921), Oxford United (1988), Reading (2013)
2 seasons: Darwen (1894), Millwall (1990)
1 season: Glossop North End (1900), Leyton Orient (1963), Northampton Town (1966), Carlisle United (1975), Swindon Town (1994), Barnsley (1998)
Seasons in Premier League
There are 51 teams that have taken part in 34 Premier League championships that were played from the 1992–93 season until the 2025–26 season. The teams in bold compete in the Premier League currently. The year in parentheses represents the most recent year of participation at this level. Six teams have competed in every Premier League season, those being Arsenal, Chelsea, Everton, Liverpool, Manchester United, and Tottenham Hotspur.

34 seasons: Arsenal (2026), Chelsea (2026), Everton (2026), Liverpool (2026), Manchester United (2026), Tottenham Hotspur (2026)
31 seasons: Aston Villa (2026), Newcastle United (2026)
30 seasons: West Ham United (2026)
29 seasons: Manchester City (2026)
25 seasons: Southampton (2025)
19 seasons: Fulham (2026)
18 seasons: Blackburn Rovers (2012), Leicester City (2025)
17 seasons: Crystal Palace (2026), Sunderland (2026)
16 seasons: Leeds United (2026)
15 seasons: Middlesbrough (2017)
13 seasons: Bolton Wanderers (2012), West Bromwich Albion (2021)
12 seasons: Wolverhampton Wanderers (2026)
10 seasons: Stoke City (2018), Norwich City (2022), Burnley (2026)
9 seasons: Coventry City (2001), Bournemouth (2026), Brighton & Hove Albion (2026), Nottingham Forest (2026)
8 seasons: Sheffield Wednesday (2000), Wimbledon (2000), Charlton Athletic (2007), Wigan Athletic (2013), Watford (2022)
7 seasons: Derby County (2008), Portsmouth (2010), Birmingham City (2011), Queens Park Rangers (2015), Swansea City (2018)
6 seasons: Sheffield United (2024), Ipswich Town (2025)
5 seasons: Hull City (2017), Brentford (2026)
3 seasons: Reading (2013)
2 seasons: Oldham Athletic (1994), Bradford City (2001), Cardiff City (2019), Huddersfield Town (2019)
1 season: Swindon Town (1994), Barnsley (1998), Blackpool (2011), Luton Town (2024)
International competitions
Qualification for European competitions
See also: UEFA coefficient § Men's association coefficient
Qualification criteria for 2025–26
See also: 2025–26 UEFA Champions League § Association team allocation
The top four teams in the Premier League qualify automatically for the subsequent season's UEFA Champions League league phase. The champions of the Champions League and UEFA Europa League may earn an additional qualification for the subsequent season's Champions League league phase if did not finish in the top four. There are additional berths for the two best associations in the previous season's rankings, which may result in a maximum of seven teams from one association in the Champions League.[105]

The fifth-placed team in the Premier League, as well as the winners of the FA Cup, qualify for the subsequent season's Europa League league phase, but if the winner of the FA Cup also finishes in the top five places in the Premier League or has won one of UEFA's major tournaments, then this place reverts to the team that finished sixth. The winner of the EFL Cup qualifies for the subsequent season's UEFA Conference League, but if the winner had already qualified for a UEFA competition via their performance in another competition, then this place reverts to the team that finished sixth in the Premier League, or seventh if the FA Cup result had already caused the sixth-placed team to qualify.[106]

The number of places allocated to English clubs in UEFA competitions is dependent upon the position the country holds in the UEFA coefficient rankings, which are calculated based on the performance of teams in UEFA competitions over the previous five years. Currently, England is ranked first, ahead of Spain.

As of 1 June 2025, the coefficients for are as follows (only top five European leagues are shown):[107][108]

Awards
Trophy

The Premier League trophy

The gold Premier League trophy awarded to Arsenal for winning the 2003–04 title without defeat
The Premier League maintains two trophies – the genuine trophy (held by the reigning champions) and a spare replica. Two trophies are held for the purpose of making the award within minutes of the title being secured, in the event that on the final day of the season two clubs are still within reach of winning the League.[286] In the rare event that more than two clubs are vying for the title on the final day of the season, a replica won by a previous club is used.[287]

The current Premier League trophy was created by Royal Jewellers Garrard & Co/Asprey of London and was designed in house at Garrard & Co by Trevor Brown and Paul Marsden. It consists of a trophy with a golden crown and a malachite plinth base. The plinth weighs 33 pounds (15 kg) and the trophy weighs 22 pounds (10.0 kg).[288] The trophy and plinth are 76 cm (30 in) tall, 43 cm (17 in) wide and 25 cm (9.8 in) deep.[289]

Its main body is solid sterling silver and silver gilt, whilst its plinth is made of malachite, a semi-precious stone. The plinth has a silver band around its circumference, upon which the names of the title-winning clubs are listed. The green of the malachite represents the green field of play.[289] The design of the trophy is based on the heraldry of Three Lions that is associated with English football. Two of the lions are found above the handles on either side of the trophy – the third is symbolised by the captain of the title-winning team as he raises the trophy, and its gold crown, above his head at the end of the season.[290] The ribbons that drape the handles are presented in the team colours of the league champions that year. In 2004, a special gold version of the trophy was commissioned to commemorate Arsenal winning the title without a single defeat.[291]

For many postgraduate students, a Ph.D. thesis will be their magnum opus – the zenith of their academic achievement. And with such a significant amount of time and effort being invested, it’s important that study topics are chosen wisely. Hence, it’s comforting to know that the world of academic research is a far more inclusive, eclectic and remarkably unusual place than one might first assume. However left-field a particular subject might seem, there are almost certainly countless other research papers that wipe the floor with it in the weirdness stakes. Here are 30 of the very strangest.

30. Ovulation: A Lap Dancer’s Secret Weapon
To investigate the theory that estrus – the interval of amplified fertility and sexual awareness often referred to as “heat” in mammals – is no longer present in human females, researchers turned to an unlikely source: lap dancers. A team from the University of New Mexico led by evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller enlisted the help of 18 professional dancers. These dancers documented their ovulatory cycles, shift patterns and the amount of tips they received over the course of 60 days. Published in 2007 in the journal Evolution and Human Behavior, “Ovulatory cycle effects on tip earnings by lap dancers: economic evidence for human estrus?” noted a distinct correlation between estrus and greater income from gratuities, representing what the researchers called “the first direct economic evidence for the existence and importance of estrus in contemporary human females.”

29. Which Can Jump Higher, the Dog Flea or the Cat Flea?
Froghoppers aside, fleas are the overachieving long jumpers of the animal kingdom. Fleas have body lengths of between 0.06 and 0.13 inches but can leap horizontal distances more than a hundred times those figures. But were all fleas created equal in the jumping stakes? To find out which would triumph between the dog- and cat-dwelling varieties, researchers from the Ecole Nationale VÃ©tÃ©rinaire de Toulouse, France meticulously recorded the leaping efforts of a collection of both species of flea. Published in 2000, the resulting paper, “A comparison of jump performances of the dog flea, Ctenocephalides canis, and the cat flea, Ctenocephalides felis felis,” declared the dog flea the winner. Yes, the canine-inclined insect jumps both higher and further than its feline-partial opponent. In 2008 the research team scooped the Annals of Improbable Research‘s Ig Nobel Prize in the biology category – the Ig Nobel Prizes being awards that recognize the feats of those who “make people laughâ€¦ and then think.”

28. On Ethicists and Theft
Death row pardons, lottery wins and rain on your wedding day – all (arguably non-ironic) subjects referenced by Alanis Morissette in her 1996 single “Ironic.” One topic that would probably merit inclusion – despite the research not being published until 2009 (in Philosophical Psychology) – is the revelation that books on ethics are more liable to be absent from the shelves of university libraries than comparable books on other philosophical subjects. “Do Ethicists Steal More Books?” by University of California, Riverside professor of philosophy Eric Schwitzgebel revealed that the more recent, esoteric ethics books “of the sort likely to be borrowed mainly by professors and advanced students of philosophy” were “about 50 percent more likely to be missing” than their non-ethics counterparts. However, Professor Schwitzgebel believes this is a good thing, as “the demand that ethicists live as moral models would create distortive pressures on the field.”

27. Wet Underwear: Not Comfortable
Even babies know it: wet underwear is uncomfortable. Yet precisely why this is so is a question that went unanswered by hard science until 1994, when the journal Ergonomics published “Impact of wet underwear on thermoregulatory responses and thermal comfort in the cold.” The authors were Martha Kold Bakkevig of SINTEF Unimed in Trondheim, Norway and Ruth Nielson at Kongens Lyngby’s Technical University of Denmark. Bakkevig and Nielson had investigated “the significance of wet underwear” by monitoring the skin and intestinal warmth, as well as weight loss, of eight adult male subjects wearing wet or dry underwear in controlled cold conditions. Apart from the obvious “significant cooling effect of wet underwear on thermoregulatory responses and thermal comfort,” the research also discovered that the thickness of the underwear exerted a greater effect on these factors than the material used to make the garment. So now you know.

26. Do Woodpeckers Get Headaches?
In much the same way that we’d presume dragons don’t get sore throats, it would be a reasonable assumption that woodpeckers don’t suffer from headaches – but assumptions are a poor substitute for the authoritative grip of scientific fact. Published in 2002 in the British Journal of Ophthalmology, “Cure for a headache” came courtesy of Ivan Schwab, an ophthalmologist at the University of California, Davis. Schwab’s paper details the raft of physiological traits that woodpeckers have developed to avoid brain damage and bleeding or detached eyes when hammering their beaks into trees at up to 20 times a second, 12,000 times a day. In addition to a very broad but surprisingly squishy skull and sturdy jaw muscles, the woodpecker has a “relatively small” brain – which probably explains a lot.

25. Booty Calls: the Best of Both Worlds?
Compromise, according to U.S. poet and author Phyllis McGinley at least, is what “makes nations great and marriages happy.” It’s also the backbone of the booty call, if research published in 2009 is anything to go by. Appearing in The Journal of Sex Research, “The â€˜booty call’: a compromise between men’s and women’s ideal mating strategies,” was written by researchers from the department of psychology at New Mexico State University. The study analyzed the booty-calling behavior of 61 students from the University of Texas at Austin. What’s more, it confirmed its central thesis that “the booty call may represent a compromise between the short-term sexual nature of men’s ideal relationships and the long-term commitment ideally favored by women.” Lead researcher Dr. Peter K. Jonason, now working at the University of Western Sydney, shared follow-up papers in 2011 and 2013, for The Journal of Sex Research and Archives of Sexual Behavior, respectively.

24. Mosquitoes Like Cheese
The mosquito is a formidable and destructive pest. And while it’s known that exhalation of carbon dioxide by its victims acts as a highly compelling invitation to dinner, other smelly signals have been less well documented. Published in The Lancet, Bart Knols’ 1996 research, “On human odor, malaria mosquitoes, and Limburger cheese,” changed that. The entomologist described how Anopheles gambiae, Africa’s most prolific malaria-spreading mosquito, exhibited a keen partiality for biting human feet and ankles. Crucially, the research also showed that these mosquitoes can be attracted to Limburger cheese, a stinky fromage that shares many characteristics with the whiff of human feet, offering potential use as a synthetic bait for traps. Interestingly, Knols is one of the few people to have won an Ig Nobel (for entomology in 2006) and a Nobel Peace Prize (shared in 2005 as part of the International Atomic Energy Agency).

23. Weighing Up Lead and Feathers
It doesn’t require a degree in physics – or philosophy – to understand that a pound of lead and a pound of feathers weigh the same. Yet the question of whether or not they feel the same is rather less straightforward. To examine this, researchers from the department of psychology at Illinois State University enlisted the help of 23 blindfolded volunteers, recording their perceptions of the weight of either a pound of lead or a pound of feathers contained within boxes of precisely the same shape and size. Published in 2007, the paper – “â€˜Which feels heavier – a pound of lead or a pound of feathers?’ A potential perceptual basis of a cognitive riddle” – discovered that participants rated the pound of lead as seeming weightier with an “above chance” frequency. The suggestion is that factors such as the “muscular forces” required to handle an object could also play a role in perceptions of weight.

22. Cat Food – Yummy?
Despite their notorious penchant for fully, or sometimes partially, dead rodents in their mouths, cats are surprisingly fussy eaters. What’s more, the pet food industry has found that kitties themselves represent unreliable and expensive test subjects in the pursuit of more appealing cat food flavors. Professor Gary Pickering of the department of biological sciences at Brock University in Ontario, Canada detailed a better option in 2009: the human palate. “Optimizing the sensory characteristics and acceptance of canned cat food: use of a human taste panel” describes the bizarre methodology for human tasters to “profile the flavour and texture of a range of cat food products” – including evaluating “meat chunk and gravy/gel constituents.” The impact of this on the number of job applications to the beer- and chocolate-tasting industries remains to be seen.

21. The Unhidden Dangers of Sword Swallowing
While “cat food taster” is unlikely to appear on anybody’s dream job list, at least that profession is unencumbered by the daily risk of serious injury. Sword swallowing, on the other hand, though occupying a similar position on the league table of tastiness, is a rather more hazardous occupation. In order to establish just how hazardous, radiologist Brian Witcombe and world champion sword swallower Dan Meyer analyzed the “technique and complications” of 46 members of the Sword Swallowers’ Association International. Published in 2009 in the British Medical Journal, their research, “Sword swallowing and its side effects,” found that performers had a heightened chance of injury when “distracted or adding embellishments” – as in the case of one unfortunate swallower who lacerated his throat after being disturbed by a “misbehaving macaw on his shoulder.” In 2007 Witcombe and Meyer together received the Ig Nobel Prize in medicine in view of the pair’s “penetrating medical report.”

20. Beer Bottle vs. Human Skull
Common weekend warrior tales would suggest that a beer bottle makes a good weapon in the event of a bar brawl. But would a full or an empty bottle inflict the most damage, and would that damage include fracturing a human skull? These important questions were answered in 2009 by a team of researchers from the University of Bern with their seminal paper, “Are full or empty beer bottles sturdier and does their fracture-threshold suffice to break the human skull?” Dr. Stephan Bolliger and his colleagues tested the breaking energy of full and empty beer bottles using a drop tower. Moreover, they discovered that a “full bottle will strike a target with almost 70 percent more energy than an empty bottle,” but that either is capable of breaking a human skull. Good to know. In a great twist of irony, Dr. Bolliger and co. picked up a 2009 Ig Nobel Prize in the “Peace” category.

19. The Propulsion Parameters of Penguin Poop
The titles of scientific research papers can sometimes be fairly impenetrable to the layman; other times they may take a more direct approach. Published in 2003, “Pressures produced when penguins pooh – calculations on avian defecation” certainly belongs to the latter category. The paper’s authors, Victor Benno Meyer-Rochow of the then International University Bremen (now Jacobs University Bremen) and EÃ¶tvÃ¶s LorÃ¡nd University‘s Jozsef Gal, decided to address the question of how much internal pressure penguins generate for poop-firing purposes. With knowledge of just a few parameters – including the thickness of and distance covered by the fecal matter – the researchers were able to calculate that the birds employed pressures of up to 60 kPa (kilopascal) to eject their bodily waste. The project was inspired by a blushing Japanese student who, during a lecture, asked Dr. Meyer-Rochow how the penguins “decorated” their nests.

18. Lady Gaga and Pop Art
Lady Gaga clearly sees herself as something of an artist: her third album is called Artpop, and last year she voiced her desire to “bring art culture into pop in a reverse Warholian expedition.” But does anyone else agree? In 2012 University of Cambridge student Amrou Al-Kadhi decided to write a few words – 10,000 to be precise – on the subject for his final year undergraduate dissertation. The paper, looking at Lady Gaga’s place in the history of pop art and her role as a voice of cultural criticism, initially encountered some resistance from the Cambridge history of art department. However, after several meetings, the provision of a barrage of YouTube links to Gaga videos such as “Telephone” (which apparently demonstrated her postmodern aesthetic) and “a bit of work,” permission for Al-Kadhi to undertake the research was granted.

17. Even Chickens Prefer Beautiful People
A 2002 research paper by Stefano Ghirlanda, Liselotte Jansson and Magnus Enquist at Stockholm University decided to make inroads into the question – most likely contemplated by very, very few people – of whether “Chickens prefer beautiful humans.” The study saw six chickens trained to “react to” images of an ordinary male or female face. They were then tested on a series of images ranging from the average face to a face with exaggerated male or female characteristics, and a group of 14 (human) students were given the same test. Perhaps surprisingly, the chickens “showed preferences for faces consistent with human sexual preferences.” The researchers claim this offers evidence for the hypothesis that human preferences stem not from “face-specific adaptations” but from “general properties of nervous systems” – perhaps overlooking the possibility that their human test group just had very unusual tastes.

16. Erase Bad Memories, Keep Good Ones
Painful, embarrassing, or traumatic memories have an annoying habit of accumulating over the course of an average lifetime. As Courtney Miller, assistant professor at the Florida campus of The Scripps Research Institute, puts it, “Our memories make us who we are, but some of these memories can make life very difficult.” With that in mind, Miller led a team of researchers to try and find out whether certain unwanted memories – specifically, drug-related ones – could be erased without damaging other memories. Published in 2013, “Selective, Retrieval-Independent Disruption of Methamphetamine-Associated Memory by Actin Depolymerization” found that, in mice at least, this kind of bespoke amnesia is entirely possible. How? By means of inhibiting the formation of a particular molecule in the brain. “The hope is,” said Miller, “that our strategies may be applicable to other harmful memories, such as those that perpetuate smoking or post-traumatic stress disorder.”

15. The Rectal Route to Curing Hiccups
When beset by a flurry of hiccups, a few minutes of putting up with the involuntary jolting is usually sufficient to get them to subside. However, other times they can become a far more unmanageable problem, beyond the healing scope of even the oldest of wives’ tales. In such situations there’s a surprising but highly effective cure. Published in 1990, “Termination of intractable hiccups with digital rectal massage” details the case of a 60-year-old patient whose seemingly non-stop hiccups were brought to an immediate halt by a massaging finger in the rectum. A second occurrence a few hours later was curbed in a similar fashion. The research from the Bnai Zion Medical Center in Israel notes that “no other recurrences were observed.” The inspiration for the report was Dr. Francis Fesmire, who penned a medical case report with the same title in 1988 and with whom the researchers shared an Ig Nobel in 2006. Fesmire passed away in 2014, and one fitting epitaph from an entertainment-oriented research magazine mused, “Dr. Fesmire found joy and fame by putting his finger on – nay, in – the pulse of his times.”

14. Can Pigeons Tell a Picasso From a Monet?
Theirs is a list dominated by flying, pecking and defecating, and pigeons can now add “appreciation of fine art” to their skill set. Published in 1995, “Pigeons’ discrimination of paintings by Monet and Picasso” came courtesy of Shigeru Watanabe, Junko Sakamoto and Masumi Wakita at Keio University in Japan. And sure enough, the paper presents evidence that pigeons are indeed able to distinguish between works by the two artists. The birds were trained to recognize pieces by either Monet or Picasso; and crucially they then demonstrated the ability to identify works by either creator that had not been shown to them during the training period. Not bad for rats with wings. Professor Watanabe – who went on to explore paddy birds’ appreciation of the spoken word – put the paper into context, saying, “This research does not deal with advanced artistic judgments, but it shows that pigeons are able to acquire the ability to judge beauty similar to that of humans.”

13. The Nature of Navel Lint
It’s a phenomenon that most people will be familiar with: small balls of lint accumulating in the belly button. Still, until fairly recently the mechanism behind this process lacked a satisfactory explanation from the realm of science. Fortunately, that all changed in 2009 when Georg Steinhauser, a chemist and researcher at the Vienna University of Technology, published a research paper entitled “The nature of navel fluff.” After gathering 503 samples of navel lint, Dr. Steinhauser concluded that the culprit behind this common occurrence is hair on the abdomen, which dislodges small fibers from clothing and channels them into the belly button. As the Austrian himself has pointed out, “The question of the nature of navel fluff seems to concern more people than one would think at first glance.”

12. The Effects of Cocaine on Bees
The effects of cocaine on human body movement can be observed in nightclubs the world over on just about any given weekend. And as it turns out, the tediously familiar overestimation of dancing prowess is not just limited to humans. In a 2009 paper entitled “Effects of cocaine on honey bee dance behavior,” a team of researchers led by Gene Robinson, entomology and neuroscience professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, analyzed how honey bees are affected by low doses of cocaine. Honey bees are known to perform dances when they locate an abundant food source; and the team found that administering the drug prompted bees to circle about 25 percent quicker as well as dance more exuberantly and for longer. The bees also exaggerated the scale of their bounty. No surprise there then.

11. Fruit Bat Fellatio
Though its contents are difficult at first to make out, the grainy black and white image above actually depicts two bats engaged in some X-rated nocturnal activity. And that’s precisely the topic that a group of researchers from China and the U.K. chose to explore in their 2009 paper, “Fellatio by fruit bats prolongs copulation time.” The group looked at the copulatory behavior of the short-nosed fruit bat and observed that “females were not passive during copulation but performed oral sex.” More interestingly, the researchers also discovered that the longer the bats spent engaged in fellatio, the longer the copulation itself lasted – and that when fellatio was absent, pairs spent much less time mating.

10. The Possibility of Unicorns
It’s a question that has plagued the internet for decades: could unicorns really exist? The short answer, at least, is no. Still, King’s College London philosophy undergraduate Rachael Patterson decided to investigate whether a full dissertation on the more theoretical aspects of the subject would yield the same conclusion. Her paper, “The Possibility of Unicorns: Kripke v Dummett,” picks up on previous theses by British philosopher Michael Dummett and American logician and philosopher Saul Kripke. Why? In order to see if any more rainbow-hued light could be shed on this important question, of course. Reassuringly, perhaps, neither Kripke nor Dummett claim that these mythical creatures live in reality – although Dummett does posit the idea that in another world they might.

9. Does Country Music Make You Suicidal?
Country music is one of the most popular genres of music in the United States, with a huge audience that encompasses all age ranges. Yet given its recurrent themes of wedded disharmony and excessive drinking, Steven Stack of Wayne State University and Auburn University‘s Jim Gundlach decided to probe whether country music might have an influence on municipal suicide rates in America. Published in 1992, their research paper, “The Effect of Country Music on Suicide,” actually discovered a strong link between the amount of country music radio airplay in any particular city and the suicide rate among the white population in that area. The reaction was mixed: Stack and Gundlach initially received hate mail, but in 2004 they won the Ig Nobel Prize for medicine.

8. Do Cabbies Have Bigger Brains?
The notoriously demanding exam that London’s black cab drivers must pass is called the “Knowledge” – and with good reason. Covering around 25,000 streets inside a six-mile radius of central London, the test generally requires three to four years of preparation and multiple attempts at the final exam before success is achieved. University College London neuroscientist Eleanor Maguire was inspired to take a closer look at this feat of memory after researching similar examples in the animal kingdom. Published in 2000, the resulting study, “Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers,” discovered that “cabbies” had physically larger posterior hippocampi – the areas of the brain responsible for spatial memory – than their non-cabbie counterparts. Professor Maguire’s follow-up study (with Dr. Katherine Woollett) in 2011 confirmed that trained cabbies were better at remembering London landmarks but not as good at recalling complex visual information compared to the unsuccessful trainees.

7. Shrews: To Chew or Not to Chew?
Ever felt so hungry that you could eat a horse? How about a shrew? While such scenarios are never likely to present themselves to the average person, scientists can be an altogether more experimental bunch. Take 1995 paper, “Human digestive effects on a micromammalian skeleton,” by Brian Crandall and Peter Stahl, anthropologists working at the State University of New York. Said paper investigated what would happen to a shrew – which was first skinned, disemboweled, parboiled and cut into segments – if it was swallowed, sans chewing, by a human. Interestingly, many of the rodent’s smaller bones “disappeared” on their transit through the human digestive system, while other portions of the skeleton showed “significant damage” despite the lack of chewing – a promising result to those studying human and animal remains. Following this peculiar paper, Brian Crandall became a science educator hoping to motivate future generations of (hungry) scientists.

6. Gay Dead Duck Sex
In 1935 Austrian physicist Erwin SchrÃ¶dinger tried to highlight the absurdity of newly developed aspects of quantum theory. In his thought experiment, the strange quantum properties of a system are drawn on to suspend a hypothetical cat in a state of being simultaneously dead and alive. Sixty-six years later, a new piece of research saw the cat replaced by two ducks, in far less paradoxical though no less opposing states of life and death – but now with the crucial addition of gay sex. Published in 2001, “The first case of homosexual necrophilia in the mallard Anas platyrhynchos” describes Kees Moeliker’s bizarre experience. The Dutch ornithologist witnessed a male duck administering a 75-minute raping of the corpse of another male duck, freshly deceased after flying into a window. More recently, Moeliker has presided over an annual commemorative event and public conversation on how to make sure birds stop flying into windows. The event’s name? Dead Duck Day.

5. Love and Sex With Robots
“Intimate Relationships With Artificial Partners” – ludicrous science fiction, or serious science fact? According to the paper’s author, and British International Master of chess, Daniel Levy, “It may sound a little weird, but it isn’t.” Levy earned a Ph.D. from Maastricht University for his thesis, which covered sociology, psychology, artificial intelligence and robotics, among other fields. He conjectured that human-robot love, marriage and even consummation are “inevitable” by 2050. Roboticist Ronald Arkin from Atlanta’s Georgia Institute of Technology points out, “Humans are very unusual creatures. If you ask me if every human will want to marry a robot, my answer is probably not. But will there be a subset of people? There are people ready right now to marry sex toys.”

4. A Better Approach to Penile Zipper Entrapment
Unfortunately, the horror injury that befalls Ben Stiller’s character Ted, in 1998’s There’s Something About Mary, often traverses the realm of fiction to bestow real-world agony upon boys and men who wish they’d opted for a button fly. A 2005 paper by Dr. Satish Chandra Mishra from Charak Palika Hospital in New Delhi, India looked at reported methods of intervention for this most unpleasant of problems and found that many common approaches either take too long or can actually make the circumstances worse. The researchers’ paper, “Safe and painless manipulation of penile zipper entrapment,” details instead a “quick, simple and non-traumatic” method using wire cutters and a pair of pliers – though “painless” does seem a highly ambitious adjective in this particular context.

3. Flatulence As Self-Defense
The idea of a correlation between fear and bodily emissions of one variety or another is not surprising, but a 1996 paper by author Mara Sidoli detailed a much more extreme example of this relationship. In “Farting as a defence against unspeakable dread,” Sidoli described the miserable tale of Peter, a “severely disturbed adopted latency boy” who endured a difficult and traumatic early life. Despite various setbacks in his later growth, Peter demonstrated “considerable innate resilience.” However, he also developed what Sidoli called a “defensive olfactive container,” using his flatulence “to envelop himself in a protective cloud of familiarity against the dread of falling apart, and to hold his personality together.” With such a vivid and prose-rich approach to scientific research, it should come as no surprise that SIdoli scooped the Ig Nobel for literature in 1998.

2. Harry Potter = Jesus Christ
Putting an end, once and for all, to the notion that literary theory sometimes lacks real-world application, “Jesus Potter Harry Christ” is a thesis by Ph.D. student Derek Murphy that looks at “the fascinating parallels between two of the world’s most popular literary characters.” What’s more, after successfully exceeding his Kickstarter funding goal of $888, Murphy’s thesis has been transformed into a commercially available book, published in 2011, which won the Next Gen Indie Book Award for Best Religious Non-Fiction that same year. Though the idea of analyzing the similarities between J.K. Rowling’s boy wizard creation and the Son of God might seem like a frivolous endeavor, Murphy – who is currently doing his Ph.D. at Taiwan’s National Cheng Kung University – assures his public that the book’s contents are “academic and heavily researched.” Now, where’s the fun in that?

1. Rectal Foreign Bodies
Published in the journal Surgery in 1986, “Rectal foreign bodies: case reports and a comprehensive review of the world’s literature” does exactly what it says on the tin. The research, by doctors David B. Busch and James R. Starling, based in Madison, Wisconsin, looked at two cases of patients with “apparently self-inserted” anal objects, as well as available documentation on the subject.
Other factors taken into account included the patient’s age and history and the number and type of objects removed. The resulting list of 182 foreign bodies makes for an eye-watering read: of particular note are the dull knife (“patient complained of â€˜knife-like pain'”) and the toolbox (“inside a convict; contained saws and other items usable in escape attempts”). The doctors’ paper was recognized for its literary value with an Ig Nobel Prize in 1995. One person’s pain is clearly another’s pleasure.
In the quiet town of Eldridge, nestled between rolling hills and dense forests, there was a legend that had been passed down through generations. It spoke of an old railway tunnel, long abandoned and forgotten, that lay hidden beneath the earth like a dark, forgotten scar. The townsfolk would hush their voices when mentioning it, their eyes darting nervously as if the very name could summon the horrors that were said to dwell within. This was the tale of the Empty Tunnel, a place where the past never truly left, and the living were never truly safe.

The tunnel had once been a bustling part of the town’s history, a lifeline for trade and travel. But one fateful night, decades ago, a train had vanished within its depths, swallowed by the darkness without a trace. The authorities searched for days, but all they found were twisted tracks and an eerie silence that seemed to echo with the screams of the missing souls. From that day on, the tunnel was sealed off, and the town tried to forget its existence. But legends have a way of lingering, and whispers of ghostly apparitions and unexplained noises began to spread, turning the Empty Tunnel into a local legend of dread.

The Empty Tunnel: A Haunting Horror Story

It was a cold autumn evening when a group of friends, driven by youthful curiosity and a thirst for adventure, decided to explore the forbidden tunnel. They were college students, full of bravado and skepticism, convinced that the stories were nothing more than superstition. Among them was Sarah, a quiet girl with a keen interest in history; Jake, the confident leader of the group; Emily, the practical one who always had a plan; and Mark, the jokester who tried to lighten the mood with his humor.

As they approached the tunnel’s entrance, the air grew colder, and a sense of foreboding settled over them. The once-bustling railway now lay silent, the tracks overgrown with weeds and vines. The entrance yawned like a black maw, inviting them into its depths. Mark made a feeble attempt at a joke, but even he seemed uneasy as they stepped inside.

The tunnel was darker than they had imagined, the dim light from their flashlights barely piercing the thick darkness. The walls were damp and cold, and the air was thick with the scent of decay. They walked in silence, the only sound being the echo of their footsteps and the occasional drip of water. The deeper they went, the more the atmosphere seemed to press down on them, as if the very walls were alive and watching.

Then, without warning, the lights flickered and died. Panic surged through the group as they were plunged into complete darkness. Mark’s voice broke the silence, a strained attempt at reassurance. “Guys, it’s just the batteries. We’ll get them working again.” But as he fumbled with the flashlights, a chilling sound filled the air—a low, mournful wail that seemed to come from everywhere and nowhere at once.

Sarah felt a cold hand on her shoulder and spun around, but there was nothing there. “Who’s there?” she called out, her voice trembling. The wailing grew louder, more insistent, and she could feel the presence of something unseen, something that sent shivers down her spine. “We need to get out of here,” Emily said urgently, her voice shaking.

They turned to run, but the tunnel seemed to shift and twist around them. The walls closed in, and the floor became, uneven tripping them and slowing their escape. The wailing grew into a cacophony of screams, and they could hear whispers in the darkness—voices that spoke of pain and loss, of souls trapped forever in the Empty Tunnel.

Jake stumbled and fell, and as he looked up, he saw a ghostly figure standing before him. It was a conductor, dressed in the uniform of a bygone era, his face twisted in agony. “Leave this place,” he croaked, his voice a hollow echo. “You are not meant to be here.” The others gathered around him, their fear uniting them in a desperate struggle to escape.

As they pushed forward, they stumbled upon a section of the tunnel where the tracks had been torn apart. In the center lay a rusted lantern, its glass shattered but still glowing with a faint, otherworldly light. Sarah reached out and touched it, and in that moment, she saw visions of the past—the train that had vanished, the passengers and crew trapped in an instant of terror, their fates sealed by an unknown force.

With a newfound determination, they clutched the lantern and continued their escape. The wailing and whispers faded as they neared the entrance, and the oppressive darkness began to lift. But as they emerged into the cool night air, they knew that the Empty Tunnel would never truly be behind them. The horror they had experienced was a reminder that some places are cursed, haunted by the echoes of tragedy and loss.

Years later, the legend of the Empty Tunnel grew even darker. Those who dared to venture near it spoke of seeing ghostly figures and hearing the distant wail of the lost souls. And the group of friends, forever changed by their experience, never forgot the night they faced the horrors of the Empty Tunnel—a place where the past refuses to stay buried and the living are forever haunted by the shadows of the forgotten.
